Himalayan Series.—No. XX. 


SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


With Sanskrit Text; Paraphrase with 

* Word-by-word Literal Translation; Eng- 
lish Rendering and Comments, 

s © Index, &c. 


BY 


THE SWAMI SWARUPANANDA 


SE 
sfasa जाग्रत प्राप्य वराक्षिबोधत | 





E 
Arise! $wake! and stop not till the goal is reached, 


—4— 


° FIRST EDITION 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
1909 


Two Rupees Eight annas.] (Foreign, $1 or 4 Sh. 


PRINTED BY MOHAN LAL SAH CHOWDHARI 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE PRABUDDHA BHARATA PRESS 
MAYAVATI, ALMORA, HIMALAYAS, 


T 
OPYRIGHT REGISTERED UNDER ACT XX OE 247, 








—Ó0—— 








fe Let ; : < s ` ae P< ae हक 
qo? aay ieee 6 %७%१.% Tw छल नज करतय केद 94980 0 कि CODE 
C Gard Song SOOO eons ro THRE demam 
ONTENT 
b d 
: | Page 
FOREWORD asa nue nod bos 1 
MEDITATION er s TE 9०७ ano iV 
IxvocErrox saa ७७७ be" Due x 
CHAP: J. THE GRIEF OF ARJUNA is de | 
ps TIL Tus Way OF KNOWLEDGE... ju. तिज 
er TII. Toe Way or Action T e. 63 
>> IV. Tue Way OF RENUNCIATION OF ACTION 
IN KNOWLEDGE i ध्या 
2s V. Tue Way OF RENUNCIATION कक TOS 
es VI. Tas Way or MEDITATION... e. I2I 
a. VIL Tus Way or KNOWLEDGE WITH REALI- 
07७७ 
SATION sid s en idu 


, VIII Tas Way TO THE IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN 159 
„ IX. Tae Wav or THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE 

AND THE KINGLY SECRET ... su dus 

„ « X. Tur GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY ... 193 

» 55 XL. Taf VISION or THE UNIVERSAL Form... 212 


>> NIL Tas Way or DEVOTION ... Me 242 

>> XIII THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE KSHETRA 
AND THE KSHETRAJNA a i852 

» XIV. THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE THREE 
GUNAS was sy “a 270 


> XV. THE Way TO THE SUPREME SPIRIT ... 283 
3 XVI THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIVINE 
AND THE Non-DIVINE ATTRIBUTES ws 295 


Cusp: XVIL THE ENQUIRY INTO THE THREEFOLD 


CONTENTS 


SHRADDHA... 


- 


ie - 306 


» XVII. THE Way OF LIBERATION IN RENUN- 


अथ श्रींगीतामाहात्म्यस्‌ OR 


INDEX 
ERRATA 


CIATION a 


GITA EM 


svo net 


THE GREATNESS OF- THE 


vr sea 3 T9 
zn ~ "° 357 
ai -. 362 
- we XM 


4 
® 


PREFACE 


- 

THE Swami Swarupananda, the first President 
of the Advaita Ashrama, Mayavati, and late 
editor 6f the Prabuddha Bharata compiled the 
Present, edition of the Bhagavad-Gita, with the 
collaboration of his Brother-Sannyasins at Maya- 
Vati, and some of the Western disciples of Swami 
Vivekananda. The manuscripts were begun in 190r 
and were ready for the Press by the end of 1903, 
but through unavoidable circumstances the publi- 
cation was delayed. It was only after the passing 
away of the Swami Swarupananda, that the 
work was brought out in monthly instalments in 
T'zebuddha Bharata, and this work is now presented 
to the public in convenient book form, after being 
Carefully edited, and enlarged with additional 
comments. 

The object of the compiler was to make 
accessible to the Indian public who are educated 
in English but have a limited knowledge in 
Sanskrit, and also to the Western world, an edition 
Of the Celestial Gita, in which they will feel 
sufficient interest to follow the original text, and 
thus create a taste for the study and interpretation 
of holy Sanskrit literature. How far the compiler 
has been successful in his object can be gleaned 
from the following pages. His thoughtful com- 
ments following the commentaries of the great 
A.charyas, and illuminating side-lights thrown on 


PREFACE 


intricate places, will, we trust, be of much help to 
the study of the Gita, especially to a peginner. An 
elaborate Index has been subsequently added. 


A word of explanation as to the paraphraseris 
necessary here : Though the literal meaning of each ` 
word is given, yet to avoid the awkwardness of lan- 
guage and confusion of sense to a beginner, the . 
equivalents of case terminals of such words as are 
used to qualify some other words in the sentence, 
are omitted in most cases, 


We hope this edition will meet a much-felt 
want, not only in India but in all English-speaking 
countries, 

THE EDITORS AND PUBLISHERS, 


THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, 
MAYAVATI, HIMALAYAS d 
2546 October, 190g. 





The Swami Swarupananda. 


SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


^ 


e « FOREWORD 


e 

Tire Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita occurs in the 
Bhishma Parva of the Mahabharata ant 
comprises 18 chapters, from the 25 th., to the 
42nd. The discourse between Arjuna and 
Krishna on the battle-ficld, on the eve of the 
war which forms the subject-matter of the 
work, was strung together in seven hundred 
verses and put in its place in the body of his 
great history by Vyasa. 

The Gita opens with Dhritarashtra’s query 
to Sanjaya about the progress of events. In 
the second chapter of the Bhishma Parva, we 
find Vyasa offering the power of sight to the 
blind king, that he might see the war. 
Dhritarashtra declined to have it, saying he 
did not care to have eyes with which only to 
see the death of his own people; but he would 
like to hear what was happening. On this the 
Great Rishi Vyasa said, that all the occur- 
rences.in connexion with the war would be 
reflected in the mind of Sanjaya, and he 
would faithfully report them to Dhritarashtra. 

The Gita is called an Upanishad, because it 
contains the essence of Self-knowledye, ancl 


i SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


because its teachings, like those of the Vedas 
are divided into three sections, Karma (work) 
U pásaná (devotion) and Jnana (knowledge). 


The first chapter is introductory. The 
second is a summary of the whole work, e. g. 
| in II. 48 and the connected sloxas, sel:-less 
work devoid of desire for fruits, is taught for 
the purification of the heart; in II. 61 and the 
connected Slokas devotion is taught to the 
pure-hearted, to qualify them further for the 
highest—Sannyasa, which last is taught in II. 
71 and the connected Slokas. 


It is also usual to divide the work into three 
sections illustrative ofthe three terms of the 
Mahavakya of the Sáma-Veda, “Thou art 
That” (Chhand. Upa. VI. 8, 7) In this view 
the first six chapters explain the path of 
work without desire for fruits, and the nature 
of “Thou.” The next six chapters deal with 
devotion and the nature of * That." "The last 
six describe the state of the highest. knowl- 
edge and the nature of the middle term of the. 
Mahavakya, in other words, the means of re- 


establishing the identity of “Thou” and 
“That.” 


The central teaching of the Gita is the 
attainment of Freedom, by the performance of 
one’s Swadharma or duty in life. “Do thy 
duty without an eye to the results thereof. 
Thus shouldst thou gain the purification of 


FOREWORD 11! 


heart which is essential for Moksha,"—seems 
to be the keynote of Krishna’s teachings to 
Aijuna. 

It is well-known why the Gita came into 
existence. It was owing to Arjuna's un- 
willingnesg to do his duty as a Kshatriva— to 
aight for a just cause— because it involved. the 
destruction of his own people. Not that 
Arjuna did not recognise the justice and right 
of the cause, but he would rather renounce 
the world and try for Moksha than kill his 
relatives and friends, Krishna's characterisa- 
tion of this weakly sentimental attitude of 
Arjuna is well-known. He called it “ Un- 
Arya-like delusion, contrary to the attainment 
alike wf heaven and honour" and exhorted 
Partha to “yield not to unmauliness” but to 
“cast off this mean faint-hearteduess . (II. 2-3). 
“Could a coward who fails to do his duty, be 
worthy to attain Moksha?"—seems to be 
Krishua's rejoinder. Could a man not purified 
by the, fre-ordeal of his Swadharma, could a 
renegade, a slave, attain Moksha? No! says 
the Lord. And this is the lesson we Indians 
have forgotten all these years, though we have 
been reading and discussing the Gita all the 
time. 


5: 


MEDITATION 


¥ पार्थाय प्रतिवोधितां भगवता नारायशेन खर्य « 
ब्यासेन ग्रथितां पुराखसुनिना मध्येमहाभारतम। 
sanas भगवतीमधादशाध्यायिनी 
मेव त्वामचुसंदःधामि भगद्गीते भवद्धेषिशीम ॥१॥ 

xit Om! भसवता By the Lord नारायणेन (The One 
Refuge of all beings) Narayana स्वये Himself पार्याय 
ब्रनिरोधित्ता with which Partha was enlightened yarar- 
मुनिना by ithrough the lips of} the ancient sage व्यासेन 
Vyasa महाभारतम मध्ये in the Mahabharata mW in- 
corporated, भगवती the blessed Mother अददेताग्रतवार्धशीं 
showering the nectar of Advaita (the philosophy of 
non-dualitvi अष्टादशाध्यायिनी in the form of eighteen | 
chapters Waarquiry destroyer of rebirth, asẹ Loving 
Mother. भगवजीते । The Lord's song) Bhagavad-Gita , 
त्वाम Uhee अनुसंदधामि | meditate upon. (1). ` 

Om: O Bhagavad Gita, with which Partha _ 
was enlightened by the Lord Narayana Him- 
sef, which was incorporated in the Maha- 
bharata by the’ ancient sage Vyasa,—the 
Blessed Mother, the Destroyer of rebirth, 
showering down the nectar of Advaita, and 
consisting. of eighteen chapters—upon Thee, 
© Bnagavad-Gitá! O Loving Mother! I 
meditate. {1° 


MEDITATION V 


नमोऽस्ठु ते व्यास विशालबुद्धे 
फलाराविंदायतपचनेत्र। 
येन त्वया भारततेलपुर्धे: 
प्रज्वालितो ज्ञानमय: प्रदीप: ॥२॥ 


e दिशालबुष्दे of mighty intellect फुललाराविन्दायतपद्मनेत्र 
with eyes as large as a full-blown lotus व्यास Vyasa 
यन त्वया by thee भारततेलपूर्ण; full of the oil of the 
Mahabharata ज्ञानमय: consisting of wisdom प्रदीपः 
lamp प्रज्वालितः lighted. ते to thee qu: salutation Bed 
be. (2). 

Salutation to thee, O Vyasa, of mighty 
intellect and with eyes large like full-blown 
lutuses, bv whom was lighted the lamp of 
wisdom, full of the Mahàbhárata-oil. 2) 


प्रपक्षपारिजाताय तो अवे Hae | 
ज्ञानमुद्राय BUTT गीतासृतदुहे नमः ॥३॥ 


प्रवन्नपार्जाताय O Thou Refuge of (the ocean-born| 
Lakshmi लोचवेचेकपारणये who holdest in one hand a 
cane for driving cows गँताश्तहुहे Thou milker of the 
Gitáziectar grqggra (]nana-mudrá : a position of the 
hands in which the tips of the forefinger and the 
thumb of each hand touch each other; an attitude 
associated with the highest Vogis and Gurus) the 
holder of Jnana-mudrá कृष्णाय to Thee O Krishna 
qq: salutation. (3) 


Salutation to Krishna, the holder of the 
Jnaua-mudra, the supreme refuge of Lakshmi, 
the milker of the Gita-nectar, in whose hand 
is the cane for driving cows. (3) 


vi SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


सर्वोपनिषदो गावो दोग्धा गोपालनंदन: | 
पार्था वत्सः सुधी सोक्ता दुग्धं गीतासूतं महत dul 


adum: all the Upanishads भातः the cows 
गोपालनन्दनः son of the cowherd (Krishna) दसधा 
the miüker qr: Partha 1 Arjuna) the qaq: calf सुधीः 
imen; of purified intellect भक्ता the drinkers महल 
ihe Supreme sd nectar गीता Gita दुग्ध the" 
mik. tal. i 

All the Upanishads are the cows, the son of 
the cowherd is the milker, Partha is the calf, 
men of purified intellect are the drinkers and 
the Supreme nectar Gita is the milk. (4). 


वसुदेबसुत देवे केसचाणूरपदेनम | 
दवकीपरमानंदे BAY qu SII dui. 


वसुदेदसुत the son of Vasudeva कॅंसचाणरमर्दने the 
destroyer GE Kamsa and Chanura देवकीपरमानन्दे the 
Supreme bliss of Devaki (mother of Krishna} 
अमदगुरूु the Guru (Teacher! of the Universe देवं God 
कृष्ण Krishna वन्दे I salute. (51. 


r 


I salute Krishna, the Guru of the Universe, 
God, the son of Vasudeva, the Destrover of 
Kamsa and Cháuura, the Supreme bliss of 
Devaki. “5 
सीष्मद्रोणतटा जयद्रणजला गांघारमीलोतपला 

शल्यग्राहवती कृपेण वही कर्शन वेलाकुला। 
अख्वत्यामाविकशेधो रमकरा दर्योधनावर्तिनी 
सोत्ताशां खलु पांडवे रणनदी कवतक: केशव HEN 


MEDITATION Vil 


भीष्सद्रोणतटा with Bhishma and Drona as the 
banks जयद्वैथज्ञला with Jayadratha as the water 
गान्धारनीलोतपला with the king of G&ndhára as the 
blue water-lily शल्यग्राहवत्ती with Shalya as the shark 
yur वहनी with Kripa as the current कर्णेन वेलाकुला 
with Karna as the high waves अख्रश्वत्यामविकणवोरमकरा 
wWithe=AshvathSma and Vikarna as terrible Makaras 
& kind of marine animal) दुर्योधनावत्तिनी with 
Durfodhana as the whirlpool सा that रणनदी battle- 
river खलु indeed पारडवेः by the Pandavas उत्तीणा 
crossed over awa: Keshava (Krishna) am: the 
ferryman. (6). 

The battle-river, with Bhishma and Drona 
as its banks, and Jayadratha as the water, with 
the king of Gandbara as the blue water-lily, 
and Shalya as the shark, with Kripa as the curr- 
ent ans Karna as the breakers, with Ashva- 
thaima and Vikarna as terrible Makaras and 
Duryodhana as the whirlpool in it-—was in- 
diced crossed over by the Pandavas, with 
Keshava as the ferryman. (6). 


घाराशयवच:सरोजममरल गीलाथगंधोत्करट 
नानाख्यानककेसरं हरिकशणासंबोधनाबोधितम 

लेके सज्जनषट्पदेरहरह:ः पेपीयमाने सुदा 
भू-हाञ्गारतपङूजं कलिमलपध्वंसिनः श्रेयसे ॥७॥ 


पाराणयंवचः-सरोजममलं The spotless lotus of the words 
of the son of Paráshara (Vyasa) भारतपंकज the Mahi- 
bharata-lotus गींताथंगन्धोतकट havine the Gita as its 
strong sweet fragrance नानाख्यानककेसर with many a 
narrative as its stamens द्वार्कयासंतोपनावोबित fully 


vili SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


opened by the discourses on Hari (the remover of 
misery} लोके in the world सज्जनघदपदेः by the Bhra- 
maraia beetle-like insect which lives solely on honey) 
of the good and the pure अहरहः day after day Wer _ 
jovously पेर्षीयमानं drunk कलिमलप्रध्वंसिमः of the des- 
rover of the taint of Kali (the age of imperfection) 
Xr ior the supreme good yara may produce. (7). 


Mav the words of the son of Paráshara,—the 
taintless lotus of the Mahabharata, having the 
Gita as its strong sweet fragrance, with many a 
narrative as its stamens, fully opened by the 
discourses on Hari and drunk joyously day 
after day by the Bhramara of the good and 
the pure in the world,—be productive of the 
supreme good to him who is eager to destroy 
the taint of Kali. (7). 


मुकं करोति वाचालं पंगुं लघयते गिरिम । 
AEI तमह वंदे परमानदमाधवम्‌ वी 


यह्क्कपा whose compassion gẹ the mute वाचालं 
eloquent qwifq makes fy the cripple Mf mountain 
लंघयते cross तं that परमानन्दमाधवं the ak-bliss-MA- 
dhava sweetest of the sweet) अहं I बन्दे salute. (8). 


1 salute that All-bliss Madhava whose com- 
passion makes the mute eloquent and the 
cripple cross mountains, (8) 


ये ब्रह्मावरुणेंद्र रुद्रमरुतः स्तुन्वति दिव्यैः स्तयै- 
वैदेः सांगपदक्रमोपनिषदैर्गायंति ये सामगा: | 
ध्यानावस्थिततदूगतेन मनसा- पश्येति यं योगिनो 


MEDITATION 1X 


यर्स्यांत न विदुः सुरासुरगशा देवाय तस्मै नमः NEN 


॥ इति ध्यानम्‌ ॥ 
वह्या Brahma (The creator) वरुण Varuna geg Indra 
` gg Rudra मरतः Maruta zi whom ffà: divine eg 
with hymns स्तुन्वान्ति praise; सामगाः the singers of 
Sama ये whom सांगापदक्कमाषनिषदेः with ful comple- 
ment of parts, consecutive sections and (crowning 
knowledge-portions) Upanishads we: the Vedas 
arafa sing योगिनः the Yogis थे whom ध्यानावालत्यिल- 
सहुतेन मनसा with the mind absorbed in Him through 
perfection in meditation ष्यन्ति see gga: the 
hosts of Devas and Asuras यस्य whose अन्त limit स 
not fag: know तस्मै to that देवाय God नमः saluta- 
tion. (9). 

Salutation to that God whom the creator 
Brahma, Varuna, Indra, Rudra and Maruta 
praise with divine hymns; Whom the singers 
of Sama sing, by the Vedas, with their 
full complement of parts, consecutive sections 
and Upanishads; Whom see the Yogis with 
their minds absorbed in Him through per- 
fection in meditation, and Whose limit the 
hosts of Devas and Asuras know net, (9). 


INVOCATION * 


Oh blessed Mother 
Who showerest (upon us) the nectar of Advaita 
In the form of (these) eighteen chapters! 

Thou Destrover of re-birth ! 

Thou loving Mother ! 

‘Thou Bhagavad-Gita ! 


ad 


Upon Thee I meditate. 


Tuee, O Vvasa, of lotus-eyes, 

And mighty intellect, 

Whe hast lighted the lamp of wisdom r 

Filled with the oil of the Mahabharata 
Thee we salute. 


Cf Thou who art the Refuge 

(of the sucean-horn! Lakshmi, 

‘Thou in whose right hand is the shepherds crook, 

Who art the milker of the divine nectar of the Gita, 
iv Thee. Oh Krishna, to Thee our salutation ! 


The Upanishads are even as the herd of cows, 
The son of the cowherd as the milker, 

Partha às the sucking-calf, 

Ané men of purified intellect the drinkers, 


Cle 11.15. I 


the supreme nectar, the milk of the Gita. 


* Another renderin, of the " Meditation.” 


xii SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA m 


In Varuna, in Indra, in Rudra and Marut: 
Thar One Whom all divine beings praise with hymns; 
Him Whom the singers of Sama-Veda tell; 
Him of Whose glory, sing in full chori, 
the Upanishads and Vedas; 
Hin Whom the Yogis see. with minds absorbed 
in perfect meditation : 
Him of Whom all the hosts of Devas and Asuras, 
Know not the Hmitations, ; 
To Him. the Supreme Good, be salutations- 
Him we salute. Him be salute. Him be salute. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


- 


॥ प्रथमोऽध्यायः ॥ 
FIRST CHAPTER 
धृतराष्ट्र उवाच ॥ 
MAYA कुरुच्षेत्रे समबंता युयुत्सवः di 
मामकाः पांडवाश्चैच किमकुचत संजय ॥१॥ 
Te 1 


धृतराष्ट्र Dhritarashtra उवाच said : 

(भोः) संजय O Sanjaya धर्मक्षेत्रे on the centre of 
religious activity p&g in Kurukshetra युयुत्सवः desir- 
eus to fight समवेताः assembled मामकाः my people 
sq and पाडवा; the Pandavas किस what एव indeed 
अकुवेत did do. 

Dhritaráshtra said : 

Tell me, O Sanjava! Assembled on Kuruk- 
shetra the centre of religious activity, desirous 
to fight, what indeed my people and the 
Pándavas did do? 


[ True it is that the two parties are gathered to- 
gether for battle, but was the influence of Kuru- 
kshetra, the sacred centre of religious and spiritual 


a SRIMAD-BUAGAVAD-GITA [2-3 


acivitv from of old. barren of any result? Did not 
the spiritual influence of the spot affécr any of the 
leaders in a war unfavourable to the occurrence of 
the baitle?—is the purport of  Dhritarashtra's 
question. | 





WAT उवाच ॥ 
b & + "C 
दृष्टा तु पांडवानोकं eq दुयाधन्स्तदा ॥ 
e D A 
MASHIA राजा War ॥२॥ 
L 2. 

संजय Sanjaya उवाच said : 

सदा हु but then पाणडवानीक the Pándava forces 
sg in battle array दृष्टा having seen राजा दुर्योधनः 
king Duryodhana sr«rzie (द्रोण) the teacher (Drona) 
STATE approaching qqa word yadta said 

Sanjaya said: 

But then king Duryodhana, having’ seen the 
Pandava forces in battle- array, approached his 
teacher Drona, and spoke these words: 

| Sanjaya’s repiy beginning with “ But then" and 
describing Durvodhana's action is a plain hint to 
the oid king that his son was afraid. For he went 
to his teacher (regarded as father) instead of to the 


commander-in-chief ; as a child in fright would run 
to Its parents in preference to others. | 


पश्येता पांडुपुचाखामाचाये महती WTA |l 


व्यूढां दुपदपुजेर तव शिष्येश धीमता ॥३॥ 
L 3 l 


Vv 

आचाय O teacher qq शिष्येश by your disciple 
धीमता talented द्रपदपुत्रेश्‌ son of Drupada 
eget arrayed पाणडुपुत्राणास्‌ of the sons of Pándu एतां 
this मरती mighty चमूस्‌ army पश्य behold 


3-6 ] FIRST CIIAPTER 3 


“Behold, O Teacher | this mighty army of the 
sons of Pandu, arrayed by the son of Drupada, 
thy gifted pupil. 

| As a scorpion would sting even that whose 
protection it sought to be iree irom fear, so did the 
wicked Duryodhana insult his teacher. His mean- 
ing injplain wards comes to this: just think of your 
stupidity in teaching the science of fight to the son 
of Drupada and to those of Pandu. ‘They are now 
arrayed to kill you !] 


अत्र शुरा महेष्वासा भीमाजुनसमा युधि ॥ 
युयुधानों विराटश्च द्रुपदश्च महारथः dll 
yeas waar: काशिराजश्च वीयेवान्‌॥ 
पुसजित्कुतिभोजश्च शैब्यश्च नरपुंगवः ॥५॥ 
qaga fata उत्तमोजाथ्य वीर्यवान्‌ ॥ 


सौभद्रो दोपदेयाच सवे एव वहारथाः dE! 


dl. wd dex 


अञ्ज here yès: mighty archers युधि in battle 
भीमाजुनसमाः eouals of (the terrible) Bhima and 
(the bright, pure) Arjuna शूराः heroes (सन्ति) (are). 
महारथः the great warrior युयुधानः (सात्याकिः) Yuyu- 
dhàna (Satyaki) aq and किराटः Virata च and gqa: 
Drupada «ierra the strong THT: Dhrishtaketu 
चेकितानः Chekitàna sp and ern: the king of 
Kashi नरपुंगवः the best of men पुरुजित Purujit = 
and कुन्तिभोज: Kuntibhoja = and शेब्यः Shaibya च 
and विक्रान्त the powerful युधामन्युः Yudhamanyu | 
and वीयेवाच्‌ the brave उत्तमाजाः Uttamauja prg: 
the son of Subhadrá च and द्रौपदेयाः the sons of 
Draupadi सर्वे all (these) एव verily महारयाः great 
Warriors. 


4 SRIMAD-BITAGAVAD-GITA [6-7 


“Here fare) heroes, mighty archers, the 
equais in battle of Bhima and Avjuna—the 
great warriors Yuvudhána, Viráta, Drupada ; 
the valiant Dhrishtaketu, Chekitàna and the 
king of Kashi, the best of men Purujit, Kunti- 
Bhoja and Shaibya; the powerful Yudhá- 
manyu and the brave UttamaujaS; the són of 
Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi,—lords 
of great chariots, 

[Great-charioted : One who is well versed in the 


science of war and commands eleven thousand 
bowmen. | 


senti तु विशिष्टा ये तानबह्निबोध डिजोत्तम ॥ 
नायका मम सेन्यस्य Gara तान्ब्रवीमि ते ॥७॥ 


Ja 37 
(ह) दिजोसम (O Thou) best of the twice-born 
अस्माकं of us तु also ये (those) who Afer: disting- 
uished मम my सेन्यस्य of the army नायका; leaders 
खान्‌ them निवोध know ते संज्ञार्थं for your information 


f£ 


ara them व्रवीमि I relate. 


Hear also, O Best of the twice-born! the 
names of those who (are) distinguished 
amongst ourselves, the leaders of my army. 
These I relate (to you) for your information. 


[ However well-versed in the science of war you 
might be, you are after all a Brahman (best of the 
twice-born) a lover of peace, that is to say, a coward. 
It is therefore natural for you to be afraid of the 
Pandava force. But we too have, take heart, great 


warriors in our ranks—is the veiled meaning of 
Duryodhana's word's.] 


8-10 ] THE GRIEF OF ARJUNA Y 


सवान्भीष्मञ्च कराव कृपश्च समितिजयः N 


~ ~ S A €. e 
अश्वत्थामा [वकणाश्च सामदात्तजयदथ: ॥5॥ 
E 20% 

भवान Thyself = and भीष्मः Bhishma sp and करणः 
Karnaafafa aa: the victorious in warggq: Kripaspand 
ग्म्चत्यामा८4 ४०४14804 «p and विकणं Vikarna सौमदत्तिः 
the sgn of the Somadatia जयद्रथः Jayadratha. 

“Thyself and Bhishma and Karna and Kripa, 
the victorious In war, Asvatthama and Vikarna 
and Jayadratha, the son of Somadatta. 

[ Afraid lest he had said too much Duryodhana 
is flattering Drona, by mentioning the latter before 
even Bhishma and qualifying Drona’s brother-in-law 
with the phrase ‘ victorious in war,’ amove likely to 
touch the heart of most mortals. | 


Cc we ex 
अन्ये TACT: शूरा मदर्थे त्यक्तजीविताः ॥ 
नानाशस्त्रप्रहरणा: सवे युद्धविशारदाः INEN 
Lu 

मदर्थे For my sake त्यक्तज्ीविताः determined to 
ay down (their) lives नानाशस्त्प्रहरणाः having diverse 
veapons and missiles सर्वे all युद्धाविशारदाः well- 
killed in fight अन्येच and other qga: many zmr: 
ieroes (सन्ति) (are). 

" And many other heroes also, well-skilled 
a fight, and armed with many kinds of 
veapons, are here determined to lay down 
heir lives for my sake. 


पयो तदस्माकं बलं भीष्माभिरक्षितम्‌ ॥ 
ara त्विदमेतेषां वलं भामाभिर्रक्षतम्‌ ॥१०॥ 


2 


a 


n SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap. 


I. ro. 


अस्माकं Our तत्‌ this भीष्माभिरक्षितम्‌ commanded by 
Bhishma बल army spyqa[H unlimited g while एतेषा म. 
their भामामिरक्षितम commanded by Bhima इदम्‌ this 
qa army qum limited. 

“This our army commanded by Bhishma (is) 
impossible to be counted, but that army of 
theirs, commanded by Bhima (is} easy to 
number. 


Durvodnana considers his army inefficient and that 
of the enemy efficient. But this view seems in- 
apposite to the context. 


The verse is often interpreted to mean that 


अयनेघु च aay यथाभागमवस्थिता: ॥ 
भाष्ममेवामिरक्षन्तु भवन्तः सवे एच हि ॥११॥ 
i- X5 
चच expletive) aĝ in all अयनेषु the divisions (of 
the army: यथाभागं in (your) respective positions 
negar: being stationed भवन्तः ye सर्वे all एव हि 


used for emphasis) भीष्मम Bhishma एवं alone 
अनिरत्तन्तु protect - 


~ Now} Do, being stationed in your proper 


paces in the divisions of the army, support 
Biishma alone 


. Since I cannot expect from vou anv initiative, do 


Vou what you are toid to do,—seems to be :Durvo- 
duana's intention 


तस्य संजनयन्हब Here: पितामहः ॥ 
ex. - of ~A क R 
"सहनाद ATS: TSH दध्मो प्रतापवान्‌ ॥१२॥ 


इ७-13 | TITE GRIEF OF ARJUNA प्र 


1. IR 


- 

प्रतापवान the powerful pega: oldest of the Kurus 
[पितामहः grandsire तस्य his (Duryodhana's) हषे cheer 
संजनयत्र causing उच्चैः aleud इसेहनादे lion's roar विनद्य 
having sounded gu conch zeny blew. 

That powerful, eldest of the Kurus, Bhishma 
the.grandsire, in order to cheer Duryodhana, 
uow sounded aloud a lien-roar and blew his 
conch. 


[All eres were turned upon Duryodhana and the 
penetrating intelligence of Bhishma detected his fear; 
and since Drona took no notice of Duryodhana's 
words, knowing his grandson as tne did, he had no 
difficulty in understanding that the latter had spoken 
to his teacher ina way which called forth Drona's 
coldness instead of his enthusiasm 16 Grand- 
sire's heart was moved in pity and hence the action 
on his part described in the above verse. It should 
here be noted that this action, amounted to a 
challenge, really began the fight. It was the Kaurava 
side again which took the aggressor's part: | 


ततः शङ्खाश्च भयश्च पणवानकगोमुखाः d 


सहसेवाभ्यहन्यन्त स शब्दर्तुमुलोऽभवत्‌ ॥१३॥ 
1. X3. 

ततः then weer: conches wp and भेर्यः kettledirums 
चृशवानकगामुखाः tabors, trumpets and cowhorns 
सहसा एव quite suddenly अभ्यद॑न्यन्त blared forth सः 
that yag: noise gga: tremendous अभवत्‌ was. 

Then following Bhishma, conches aud kettle- 
drums, tabors, trumpets and cowhorus blared 
forth suddenly from the Kaurava side and 
the noise was tremendous, 


^ SRIMAD-BAAGAVAD-GIT [ Chap. 1. 


७. 4 D a e e. 
नतः Hawa महति स्यन्दने [स्थतो di 
ES 
araa: पाण SITS दिव्यौ ASST प्रदध्मतुः tli 
Lo d 

aa: Then शवे: ga: wiih white horses seg yoked 
मति in tke magnificent ह्यन्दने chariot Raray stationed 
माधवः ihe Lord of Fortune: Krista) Madheva च 
and पारइवः ithe best of the Pándu princes: Arpina! 
Pandava fear divine TE. conches geg: blew 
'n à spiendid manner. 

Then. also, Madhava and Pandava, stationed 
in thelr magnificent chariot yoked ‘to white 
horses, blew their divine conches with 2 
furious noise. 


पाञ्चजन्यं हृपीकेशो देवदत्तं घनंजय: | 
e 


~ 


had a 
पॉण्ड दध्मो महाशडुखे भीमकसो THT: dew 
[oe X3 
इशीकेशः (The Lord of the Senses: Krishna) 
FInstukesiiaqrgrsres the conch named, Pánchajanya 
धनञ्जयः (Lhe victor of wealth: Arjuna) Dhananjaya 
देवदत्त ithe conch named) Devadatta भीमकर्मा doer of 
terrine deeds हकर: (having the belly of a tiger: 
Bluma)! Vrikodara मराशड्ख the large conch पोणड 
named: Paundra दमा blew 


5 
T 
£ 


Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya, Dhanan- 
java, the Devadatta, and Vrikodara, the, doer 
of terrinc deeds, his large conch Paundra. 
अनव्तविजये राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः I 
चुल. Questa सुधाषमाशएष्पका ॥१८॥ 


F4-18 | THE GRIEF OF ARJUNA 3 


1. 16. 

garga: son of Kuru राजा king qt: Yudhish- 
thira HARP THT ithe conch named) Anantavijava 
"Ier Nakula सहदेय च and Sabadeva waryafar- 
"पुष्ण्की iconcbes named: Sughesha and Mani- 
pushpaka. 

King Vudhishthira, son of unti, blew the 
conch named £nantaciiava, and Nakula and 


eva t Suchosha and Mar puskpaka. 


काश्यश्च परमेप्वास: शिखरडी च महारथः ॥ 


TIET AA साव्याकञ्चापराजतः dsl 
Li. ds 


ऋश्यः च परमेष्वासः And ihe espern bowman 
the kine of NSshi महारयाः शिखरडी च and the great 
sarrior SInkhandi gzaq: Dhrishtadvumna fage: च 
and Virdta गअ्रपशाजिस: arf: च and the unconquer- 
ed Sátvaki. 


= 


The expert bowman, king of Kàshi, and the 
great warricr Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna and 
V iràta and ihe unconguered Satyaki ; 


® 


bar 


द्रुपदो दोपदेयाच्य BAU: प्रथिवीपते ॥ 


जामद्रश्य मंहालाड राङस्वान्द प्सु ` पृयक्पएृयक्‌॥। 2 ll 
Lo c: 


qirqa Lord of Earth ‘Dhritarâshtra) जप 
king) Drupada grqzay: = and the sons of Draupadi 
and garg: the mighiv-armed gwg: son of 
Subhadra ( Abhimanyu) सवशः all पृथक पृथक्‌ respect- 
re Wear conches geg: blew. 


FG SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA {Chap.F. 


O Lord of Earth! Drupada and the sons of 
Draupadi, and the mighty-armed son of Su- 
bhadra, all also, blew each his own conch. 


स घोषो धातेराष्ट्राणां हृदयानि व्यदारयत्‌ ॥ 
नभश्च पृथिवीं चेव तुमुलोऽव्यनुनादयन्‌ ॥१६॥ 
i ro- 


"p And स॒ that quar tremendous घोषः noise sp 
sky पृथिवी च्‌ and earth अच्यनुनादयन causing to re- 
sound धार्तराष्ट्राणां of the Dhritarashtra party हयान 
hearts व्यदारयत्‌ rent. 


And the terrific noise resounmdiro throuoh- 
out heaven and earth rent the hearts of the 
Dhritazashtra’s panty. 


Verses 74-10 are fult of hintsabout the superior- 
ity of the P&ndava party and the consequent sure 
defeat of Dhritarashtra. The figure ta which 
Sanjaya draws the old King’s attention as first 
taking up Bhishma' s challenge, is described by him: 
as the Lord of Fortune and the Pandava—the best 
of the Pandu princes. Note also the details in which 
the chariot, horses and conches of the Pandava 
party are described, and finally though the army of 
the Kauravas were more than a third as much, agaim 
as that of the Pandavas, the noise made by the formez 
was only tremendous, whereas that of the latter was: 
not only tremendous but filled the earth and ske 
with reverberations and rent the hearts of the 
former.) 


अथ व्यवस्थितान्दरश्शा धातेराष्ट्रानकपिध्वज्ञः ॥ 


पत्ते शस्त्रसपाते धनुरुद्यम्य पारडव: ॥ 
ETE तदा वाक्यमिदमाह WATTS aol 


88-22 | THE GRIEF OF ARJUNA 11 


1, 20. 


(€) महीपते? Lord of Earth (Dhritarashtra) 
अशथ then कापिध्वज: Monkey-ensigned पाणडवः Pandava 
(Arjuna) धार्तराष्ट्रान्‌ Dhritarashtra army थयवाह्थिताच 
standing marshalled Ter seeing शस्त्रसंपाते discharge 
of missiles ygẸ about to begin ya: bow उद्यम्य 
raising सदा then*हृषीके to Hrishikesha gë following 
वाक्य words आह said: 

Then, O Lord of Earth, seeing Dhritaráshtra 
army standing marshalled and shooting about 
to begin, that Pandava whose ensign was the 
monkey, raising his bow, said the following 
words to Krishna: 

[ In view of the sudden change of feeling that is 


to come over Arjuna it should be noted how full of 
the war spirit we find him in this verse. ] 


. अजुन उवाच 
सेनयोरुभयोमेध्ये रथं स्थापय मेऽच्युत ॥२१॥ 
यावदेतान्निरीक्ष्येऽहं योद्धुकामानवस्थितान ॥ 
A च A ~ 
केमेया सह योद्धव्यमस्मित्रणसमुचमे ॥२२॥ 
I. 21—22. 

अर्जुन sara Arjuna said: 

अच्युत (the changeless: Krishna) Achyuta उभयो: 
of both सेनयो: armies मध्ये in the midst मे my र्थं 
chariot स्थापय place अई I qata these योद्धकामात्‌ 
desirous to fight ग्रवस्थितान standing यावत्‌ while निरीक्षे 
scrutinise ; आस्मिन्‌ on this रणसमुद्यमे eve of battle im: 
सह with whom मया by me योद्धव्यम the battle should 
be fought. 

Aijuna said : 

Place my chariot, O Achyuta! between the 


12 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | [Chap. 1. 


‘wo armies that I may see those who stand 
tere prepared for war. On this the eve of 
te Let me know) with whom I have to 


योन्स्यमानानवेक्षेऽहं थ एतेऽत्र समागताः N 
GAUL दुदुद्धेयुद्धे प्रियचिकीबेबः ॥२३॥ 


par r 

ऋच Here in this Kurukshetra) युद्धे in battle 
EEK- of the evii-minded धार्तराष्ट्रस्य Dhritarashtra’s 
an Darvodhana: प्रियचिकीषेवः wishing to please ये 
vho एते these समागताः assembled योतल्यमानान with 
tue obiect of üghting spq«q observe. 

Fur I desire to observe those who are as- 
sembied here for fight, wishing to please the 
evii-minded Duryodhana by taking: his part 
2n this battle-field, 


Ar'una is impatient to see who dared face him 
nou 


संजय उवाच 
एवसुक्तो SIAM गुडाकेशेन भारत ॥ 
सेनयोरुभयोमेध्ये स्थापयित्वा रथोत्तमम ॥२४॥ 
भीष्मद्रोणप्रमुखतः सर्वेषां च महीक्षिताम्‌ ॥ 
उवाच पाथ पश्येतान्समवेतान्कुरूनिति IERI 
1l. 24—25. 
संजय उवाच Saniaya said: 
भारत (iescendant of king Bharata: Dhritarashtra) 


M. + ti गडाकेशेन - ~ r 
Bharata गुड by (the conqueror of sleep: 


D 


Aruna Gudakesha एवं thus gem: told ERT: 


22-26 | THE GRIEF OF ARJUNA 15 


Hrishikesha भयोः: of two सेनयो: armies मध्ये between 
भोष्मद्रोणप्रपुखत* in front of Bhishma and Drona sr 
and सवेषां (in front) of all महीक्षिता rulers of the 
earth र्‍थोत्तमं best of chariots egrafaear having 
stationed पार्यं (son of Prithá or Kunti : the name of 
Arjuna's mother, the first wife of Pandu) Partha 
eddie gathered together एतान्‌ these giga, Kurus 
qva behold इति thus उवाच spoke. 
Sanjaya said: 


Commanded thus bv Gudakesha, Hrishi- 
kesha, O Bharata, drove that erandest of 
chariots to a place between the two hosts, 
facing Bhishma, Drona and all the rulers of the 
earth, and then spoke thus, “ Behold, O Partha, 
all the Kurus gathered together!” 


तत्रापश्यत्सितान्पाथे: पितूनथ पितामहान्‌ ॥ 
आचायोन्मातुलान्ध्रातून्षुत्रान्पो AT TA AT ॥ 
agga सेनयोरुभयोराप ॥२६॥ 

IL. 26. 


ग्रथ Thea पार्थ Partha qx there उभयो both अपि the 
सेनयोः of armies (मध्ये in the midst) fegara stationed 
पिठन unclesfqaragrm grandfathers. ग्राचार्यांन leachers, 
मातुलान्‌ maternal uncles, शरान brothers (and cousins) 
पुत्रान (his own and their) sons TEE 10: | grandsons, 
तथा aud सखीन्‌ comrades, aaqa fathers-in-layy 
gee: च एव and friends as well ग्रपशश्‍यत vw. 

Then saw Partha stationed there in both the 
armies, grandfathers, fathers-in-law and uncles, 
brothers and cousins, his own and their sons 


16 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | Chap. I. 


Neither, Oh Krishna, do I see any good in 
killing these my own people “in battle. I 
desire neither victory nor empire, nor yet 
pleasure. 

f O > -- Fs न्द्‌ C AA eee ७. 

TR ना राज्यन गावल्द क मागेजाावतन SIT ll 

यृषासर्थ ASS नो राज्यं भोगाः सुखानि च॥३२॥ 

त इमेऽवश्थिता युद्धे प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा BATA च di 

e ~ a m~ 

आचायाः [पतरः घुञ्मास्तवव A [पतामहदा. ॥३३॥ 
> * ~ 

मातुलाः SaZTCE: पाजा: श्याला: सवान्वनस्तथा ३४ 
1. 32—34. 

maz (the presider over and knower of the 
senses: Krishna) Govinda सषा g% for whose sake 
न्‌ः by us खुज्यं empire भागाः enjoyments सुखानि "T 
and pleasures काड्डित desired आचार्या: texchers पितर: 
uncles पुत्रा; sons तया एव च and also पित्तामहा: grand- 
fathers मातुला: maternal uncles sqaq: fathers-in-law 
योचा: grandsons yaar: brothers-in-law qur as well 
as संवाल्चिन: (other) relatives ते they इमे these प्राणान 
lite घनानि Wand wealth त्यक्तत्वा having renounced 
युद्धे in battle अ्रवात्यिता stand, (अतः hence) न: our 
राज्येन kingdom ff for what purpose भोगे: pleasures 
ay and even जीवितेन life fF of what avail. 

Of what avail is dominion to us, of what 
avail are pleasures and even life, if these, 
O Govinda! for whose sake it is desired 
that empire, enjoyment and pleasure should 


be ours, themselves stand here in battle, having 
renounced life and wealth— 


Teachers, uncles, sons and also grandfathers, 


36-41 | TILE GRIEF OF ARJUNA 19 


T I Ge 290: 

यद्यावि Though लोभोपहतचेतस: with understan ding 

overpowered by greed एते these कुलज्ञयक्ृतं due to 
decay of a family दोष evil च and fagra in hostility 
to friends पात्तक्ं sin न no पश्यन्ति see जनादैन Janâr- 
dana कुलक्षयकृतं due to decay of a family द evil 
प्रपश्याड्भि clearly seeing अस्मामिः by us yema, पापात्‌ 
from this sin निवतितुं to turn away कथ Y hy न जय 
should not be learnt. 

Though these, with understanding  over- 
powered by greed, see no evil due to decay of 
of families, and no sin in hostility to friends, 
why should we, O Janardana, who see clearly 
the evil due to the decay of families, not turn 
away from this sin? 


कुलक्षये प्रणश्यन्ति कुलधर्माः सनातनाः N 
धर्म नष्टे कुले कत्ख्मधर्मोऽमभिभवत्युत॥४०॥ 


1» 46: 

कुलक्ञये on the decay of a family सनातना: im- 
memorial कुलधमांः family religious practices प्रणश्यन्ति 
disappear WW E spirituality being destroyed gzee 
the whole xq also ma family अधर्मः impiety 
अआमिभवाति overcomes. 

On the decay of a family the immemorial 
religious rites of that family die out. On the 
destruction of spirituality, impiety further 
overwhelms the whole of the family. 


अधमोभिभवात्कृष्ण प्रदुष्यन्ति कुलस्त्रिय: ॥ 
sig FWY वार्ष्णेय जायते QRT: ॥४१॥ 


22 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. I. 


prepared वयं we एतत this महत्‌ great qtd sin कर्तृ to 
do ब्यदसिताः resolved गअ्रहोवत alas! 

Alas, we are involved in a great sin, in that 
we are prepared to slay our kinsmen, from 
greed of the pleasures of a kingdom! 


¢ 


यदि मामप्रतीकारमशस्र ANNT: N 


ATAU रणे हन्युस्तन्मे udi भवेत्‌ ॥४६॥ 
I. 46. 


अप्रतीकारं unresisting yae unarmed af me 
शस्त्रपाणयः weapons in handyrqerpt: sons of Dhrita- 
rashtra रणे in the battle gex: should slay qa that मे 
my Raat better wa would be. 

Verily, if the sons of Dhritarashtra, weapons 
in hand, were to slay me, unresisting and un- 
armed, in the battle, that would be better 
for me. 


संजय उवाच 
एवमुक्त्वा$ज्ञन: संख्ये रथोपस्थ उपाविशत्‌ ॥ 


e ई 


ASST सशरं चापं शोकसविञ्चमात्सः ॥४७॥ 


| 47. 

संजय उवाच Sanjaya said : 

Baa: Arjuna एवं thus उक्त्वा saying संख्ये in the 
battle सशर with arrows चाप bow (named Gándiva) 
asy casting away शोकसंविम्रमानसः with a mind dis- 
tressed with sorrow शथोषल्थे on the seat of the 
chariot उपार्विशत sat down. 


Sanjaya said: 


Speaking thus in the midst of the battle-field, 


43-47 | THE GRIEF OF ARJUNA 33 


Arjuna casting away his bow and arrows, 
sank down orf the seat of his chariot, with his 
mind distressed with sorrow. 


इति अज्जुनविषादयोगो नाम प्रथमोऽध्यायः १॥ 


The end of shapter first, designated THE 
Í;RIEF OF ARJUNA. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


n छ्वितीयोष्च्याय: i 
SECOND CHAPTER 


संजय wur 

* » & has 
ते तथा ऊपयाविष्टमश्चपूणाकुलेचशम i 
विषीदन्तमिदं वाक्यम्ुवाच मधुसूदन: ॥ शा 

IL. ग. 
संजय उवाच Sanjaya said: 
agaga: Madhusudana तथा thus कुपया with pite 
आविष्टं overwhelmed TAIN कुलेक्षण म्॒ eyes dimmed 
with tears विषीदन्ते sorrowing से him (Arjuna) Fé 
ihis वाक्य word उवाच spoke. 

To him who was thus overwhelmed with pity 
aud sorrowing, and whose eyes were dimmed 
with tears, Madhusudana spoke these words : 

T Overwhelmed with pity : not Arjuna, but Arjuna s 
feeling was master of the situation. | 

श्रीभगवाचुवाच॥ | 
कुतस्त्वा कश्मलामिद विषमे समुपस्थितम ॥ 
e e. 
ग्रनायेजुएमस्वग्येमकीतिकरमजञुन ॥२॥ 
Heca 
श्रीक्रमवान उवाच The Blessed Lord said: 


1-4 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 25 


aşa Arjuna विषमे in (such a) strait ga: whence 
ga uns अनार्यजुष्टं tun-Arya-like (unworthy of a religi- 
ous màn! स्वर्यं contrary to the attainment of 
heaven gatat disgraceful कश्मले dejection त्वा 
upon thee साबुषस्थितं comes. 

Phe Biessed Lord said: 

In such a strait, whence comes upon thee, 
O Arjuna, this dejection, un-Arya-like, dis- 
graceful and contrary to the attainment of 
heaven ? 

[ Mark with what contempt Krishna regards 


Arjuna’s attitude of weakness masked by religious 
expression ! | 


oy मास्म गमः यार्थ नेतत्वय्युपपद्यते ॥ 
शुद्र हदयदौवेद्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परंतप ॥३॥ 
. Il. डे. 

पार्थ Son of Prithá seq unmanliness मास्म गमः 
do not get gaa it त्वयि in thee q उपपद्यते ill becomes 
qiqq scorcher of foes ae mean हृदयदोवल्यं faint- 
heartedness त्यक्तत्वा casting off उत्तिष्ठ 9756. 

Yield not to unmanliness, O son of Pritha! 
Ill doth it become thee. Cast off this mean 
faintheartedness and arise, O scorcher of thine 
enemies | 

अजुन उवाच N 
कर्थं भीष्ममहं संख्ये द्रोणं च मधुसूदन || 
sufi: प्रतियोत्स्यामि पूजाहोबरिसूदन ॥४॥ 
IL. 4. 
अर्जुन उवाच Arjuna said: 
अरिसूदन Destroyer of foes मधुसदन slayer of 


26 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA f Chap. 2 
Madhu gë I संख्ये in battle पूजाहों worthy to be 
worshipped भीष्म Bhishma grat च aid Drona इघुमिः 
with arrows कथ how प्रातियोत्स्यामि shall nght against. 

Arjuna said: 

—But how can I, in battle, O slayer of 
Madhu, fight with arrows against Bhishma 
and Drona, who are rather worthy to be wor- 
shipped, O destroyer of foes! 


ef 
गुरूनहत्वा [ह महानुभावानू 
AK KN 6 A d^ २ क 
श्रयाँ भक्त भक्ष्यभपाह लाक) 
e + MA 
हत्वाथकासास्तु संख्यनह न 
gala भोगान्रधिरप्रदिग्धाव tn 
गू]. 5. 
महॉसुभावान Great-souled Wee masters अदत्वा 
instead of slaying f£ surely इह लोके in this life भक्ष्यं 
bread of beggary अपि even भोक्तं to eat 3p: better 
तु but शुरून masters Far killing इह in this world 
शव even SARTA wealth and desires spem enioy- 
ments yra stained with blood yata enioy. 
surely it would be better even to eat the 


bread of beggary in this life than to slay these 
ereat-souled masters. 


But if I kill them, even in this world, all my 
enjoyment of wealth and desires wil be 
stained with blood. 


i.e. even in this world T shall be in hell.] 
A e ha Lahn 
न चताङझ्षः Weg गरायों 
Tal जयेम यदि वा नो AAG 


ho 
=] 


4-7 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 


यानेच हत्वा न जिजीविषाम- 
> e bn iN 
स्तेध्कास्थता: प्रमुख चातराष्ट्राः Nell 
IL 6. 

नः For us Rate which of the two गरीयः better q 
faq: I know not यहां whether sp we should 
conquer यदि वा or that s: us जयेयुः they should 
conquer याच whom wa very हुत्वा after slaying न्‌ 
पृज्ञजीविषामः we should not care to live | those 
धार्तराष्ट्राः sons of Dhritarashtra प्रमुख in front अवस्थिताः 
stand. 

And indeed 1 can scarcely tell which will 
be better, that they should conquer us, or that 
we should conquer them. The very sons of 
Dhritarashtra,—after slaying whom we should 
not care to live,—stand facing us. 


कार्पण्यदोपो पहतस्वभावः 
पृच्छामि त्वां धर्मसंसूढ चेताः ॥ 
यच्छ्रेयः स्यान्निश्चितं sh तन्मे 
शिष्यस्तेऽहे शाधि मां त्वां प्रपन्नम्‌ ॥७॥ 
He “7. 
कापशयदोषोषदरतस्वभाव: With (my Kshatriya) nature 
overpowered by the taint of weak commiseration 
धर्मसंमूढ चेता: with a mind in confusion about Dharma 
(Duty) eat thee पृच्छामि I ask Ñfor me ga which 
aq: good स्यात्‌ is qa that निश्चितं decidedly mfz say. 
आहं lw thy शिष्यः disciple त्वा Thee प्रपन्न taken 
refuge माँ me शाधि instruct. 
‘With my nature overpowered by weak 
commiseration, with a mind in confusion about 


~, 


28 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. z. 


duty, I supplicate Thee. Say decidedly what 
is good for me. I am Thy disciple. Instruct 
me who have taken refuge in Thee. 

| Dharma is the ness, the law of the inmost 
constitution of a thing. The primary meaning of 
dharma is not virtue or religion, but only its 
secondary significance. Fighting in a just cause is 
the religious duty or dharma of a Kshatriva, whil 
the same is a sin to a Bráhmana, because it is 
contrary to the law of his being. Working out 
one's Karma according to the law of one's own being 
is therefore the dharma or religion or wav to 
alvation of an individual. The cloud of Karma 
hides the Self-Sun from the view. The means 
which exhaust this cloud without addine to it 


and thus help in one's Self-restoration is one 
dharma 


Thy disciple: Until this declaration has been 
made, the Master may not give the highest knowl- 
edge. | 


नहि प्रपश्यामि naga 


यच्छोकसुच्छोषणमिन्द्रिवाशाम ॥ 
अवाप्य WAI sas 


राज्यं सुराणामापे चाधिपत्यम ॥८॥ 
IL 8. 


भूमो Inthe earth असपत्नं unrivalled ऋद्धं flourishing 
wsq dominion सुराणाम्‌ over the gods STG even 
प्राधिपत्य mastery च and gaa obtaining qa that 
मम my इन्द्रयाण of the senses उच्छोषणं biastine 


शाक sorrow अपनुद्यात्‌ should remove न हि प्रपश्यामि 
I do not see. 


I do not see anything to remove this 
sorrow which blasts my senses, even were 1 


7-10 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 29 


to obtain unrivalled and flourishing dominion 
e? 
over the earth, and mastery over the gods. 


संजय उवाच II 
एवमुक्त्वा हृषीकेशं गुडाकेश: परंतप:॥ 
न यात्स्य हत ग्ष्ावन्द्सुक्तत्वा तूष्ण! Tala हु ॥६॥ 
II. 9. 

संजय उवाच Sanjaya said : 

प्रंतषः The scorcher of foes गुडाकेश: Gudikesha, 
the conqueror of sleep (Arjuna) हृर्शीकेश to Hrisli- 
kesha एवं thus उकत्वा having spoken q grec I shall 
not fight इति this गोविन्द to Govinda उकत्वा saving 
तूष्णीं silent बभूत ह became. 

Sanjaya said : 

Having spoken thus to the Lord of the 
Senses, Gudákesha the scorcher of foes said, 
“I shall not fight O Govinda!” and became 
silent. 

| The object of Sanjaya in using these names is 
to remind Dhritarashtra—who mav nataraliv be a 
little elated at the prospect of Arjuna’s not fighting, — 
hat this is only a temporary weakness, sluice 
by the presence of the Lord of the Senses all 
ignorance must eventually be dispelled. Arjuna’s 


own nature also is devoid of darkness Is he not 
the conqueror of sleep, and the terror of foes? , 





तमुवाज्ञ हृपीकेश: प्रहसन्षिव भारत ॥ 
सनयोर्भयोसेध्ये विषीदन्तमिदं वच:॥१०॥ 
IL. 10, 


भारत Descendant of King Bharata Walter whom 
India is called Bharata-Varsa) Bhárai3 (Dhrita- 


a RIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [| Chap. 2. 


आगमापायिनोउनित्यास्तांस्तितिक्षस्ख भारत ॥१४॥ 
IL 7-4. 

zu son of Kunti qaret: contacts of senses 

‘ith their objects तु indeed णीतोऽ्णस्वदुःखदाः pro- 

ducers of the notions of cold and heat, pleasure and 

pain आगमापायिव: with ezinni ng and end giaa 

ha armane भारत Bhiraia ara them तितिक्षस्व bear 


“ ५ 
"wd 
vi 


id. 

Notions of heat and cold, of pain and 
Zesfure.are born, O son of Kunti, only of the 
contact uf the senses with their objects. They 
nave a beginniug and an end. They are 
inpermanent in their nature. Bear them 


ee 


a 
te 


patieutiv, O descendant of Bharata 


_ fey dared inning and an end: as distin- 
lise. Irom the terinanent Self, The more one 
alus LU luenzIv oneself with the Permanent Self, 
fug Mere uns Is anected by the agreeable and 
(Sachse cisiditions of life, 


T 
Pu 


cC. WAU wives Pease at one moment gives 
1 E ados liter, sid DO on 


m, 


o 


dio hited dm Ler naure: That is, the same 


यं faa व्यययरन्लेते पुरुष पुरुषषेस ॥ 
समदु:खखुख धारं agaaa RETA null 


IL- T$ 
TET Lull dioe chief) among men wy these 
«uude nne on pain and plessure are calm 
य LI. पुरुष 07. dweller in the body) man, = व्यथयन्ति 


PL Low ne[fzsurely yagara ior immortality 
300 | d ited, 


diel Beli man aho is the same in pain 


14-17 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE Oo 


and pleasure, whom these cannot disturb, 
alone is able, O great amongst men, to attain 
to immortality. 

[ Thus perfect sameness amidst the ‘ ills’ of lite 
means full and unbroken consciousness of our 


oneness with the Immortal Self. Thus is immortality 
attained. | 


नासतो विद्यते भावो नाभावो विद्यते सत: ॥ 


- ans io EA bes र: हर... 
उभयोरापे रष्ठोष्न्तस््वनयोस्तत्वदाश[भ. ॥१६॥ 
1. आती; 

आसतः Of the unreal भाव: existence न्‌ विद्यते is not 
सतः of the real अभावः non-existence न बिद्यते is not 
तस्वदर्शिभिः by the knowers of the Truth अनयाः 
उभयोः of these two अन्तः the final truth zg: seen. 

The Unreal never is. The Real never is 
not. Men possessed of the knowledge of the 
Truth fully know both these. 

[ Unreal: Real: The determination ot the nature 
of the Real is the quest of all philosophy. Sri 
Krishna here states that a thing which never remains 
the same for any given period is unreal, and that 
the Real on the other hand is alwaysthe same. 
The whole of the phenomenal world therefore, 
must be unreal, because in it no one state endures 
even an infinitesimal division of time. And that 
which takes note of this incessant change, and is 


therefore itself changeless,—the Atman, Conscious- 
ness,—is the Real. | 


अविनाशि तु तद्विद्धि येन सवामिद dau i 
विनाशमव्ययस्यास्य न कश्चित्कतुमहति ॥१७॥ 


IL pv. 
wa By which इदं this सब all qq is pervaded ae 


Si SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — | Chap. 2. 


“hat अविनाशि indestructible g fare know for certain 
“fae one अस्य अव्ययस्य of this iumutable विनाश 
uücsiruction Wd to do न Beta is not able 

That by which all this is pervaded,—That 
iow for certain to be indestructible. None 
has the power to destroy this Immutable. 

Tia! by which all this is pervaded, kes e 
that pervades all this as fhe Witness. | 


अन्तवन्त इमे देहा नित्यस्योक्ताः शरीरिणः di 
अनाशिनोऽप्रमेयस्य तस्माद्युध्यस्व भारत ॥ १८॥ 
H. 10. 

निलस्य Of the ever-changeless, अनाशिन: of the in- 
destructible अप्रमेयस्य of the illimitable शरीरिणः of the 
Indweller इमे these wr: bodies अन्तवन्तः having an 
end उक्ता : 27९ said भारत Bharata तस्माद्‌ therefore यु'ध्यस्व 
fight. 

Of this indwelling Self,——the Ever-change- 
less, the indestructible, the Illimitable,—these 
bodies are said to have an end, Fight therefore, 
O descendant of Bharata 


[ Arjuna's grief which deters him from his duty 
of fighting against the  Kauravas is born of 
ignorance as to the true nature of the Soul. Hence 
Sri Bhagavins strong and repeated attempts to 
illumine him on the subject. 


य एनं चेत्ति हन्तारं aera सन्यते हतम ll, 
3x A | AA + (^N ~ 
उभो तो न विजानीतो नायं हन्ति न हन्यते ॥१६॥ 
IL 19. 


यः Who एने this (Self) हन्तारं slaver बति knows 
य: च and who wq this gq slain मन्यत thinks उभो 


17-21] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 35 


both तो these न not विजानीवः know aq this ( Self) 
न not gfeq slays q not हन्यते 18 slain 


He who takes the Self to be the slaver, he 
who takes It to be the slain, neither of these 
knows. It does not slay, nor is It slain. 


| Cf. Katha Up. I. ii. 19—20. ] 


न जायते [Ed वा कदाचि- 
नायं भूत्वा भविता वा न भूयः॥ 
अजो नित्यः शाश्वतोऽयं पुराणो 


इन्यत हन्यमान शरार॥२०॥ 
II. 20. 

sq This (Self) कदाचित ever q not जायते is born 
qr or मरियते dies दा or न wear not having been भूयः 
again भर्चिया comes into being (इति) न (it is) not. 
(Another paraphrase) वा or yay having been भूयः 
again न्‌ भविता ceases to be (इति ) न (it is) not. अज: 
unborn नित्य: eternal णाश्वतः changeless पुराण: ever- 
itself अयं this (Self) शरीरे the body हन्यमाने being 
killed न्‌ not रन्यते is killed. 

This is never born, nor does It die, Itis not 
that not having been It again comes into be- 
ing. (Or according to another view: It is not 
that having been It again ceases to be). This 
is unborn, eternal, changeless, ever-itself. It 
is not killed when the body is killed. 

[ This sloka refers in the sense of denial to the 


six kinds of modification inherent in matter: sub- 
sistence, birth, growth, transformation, decay, death 


वेदाविनाशिनं नित्यं य एनमजमव्ययम्‌ ॥ 


3h SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap. 2. 


कथे स पुरुष: पाथ कं घातयाते हन्ति कम ॥२१॥ 
IL. गा. j 
ara Partha gp who wå this (Self) अविनाशिनं 
indestructible नित्यं changeless g% unborn अव्यय 
immutible वैद knows स that पुरुषः person कर्थं how 
z whom दन्ति kils d whom घातयति causes to 
slav. t 
He that knows This to be indestructible, 
changeless, without birth, and immutable, how 
is he, O son of Pritha, to slay or cause the 
slaying of another? 
| How is he do slay ?—referring to Arjuna. To 
cause fhe slayving—referring to Krishna’s own part. | 





araia atutia यथा विहाय 
नवानि गह्लाति नरोष्पराशि N 

तथा शरीराणि विहाय SN- l 
न्यन्यानि संयाति नवानि देही॥२२॥ 


IL- 22. 

नर: a man यथा as जीणांगि worn-out वासांसि 
clothes विहाय casting off अपराणि others नवानि new 
Wala takes तथा so देही the embodied जी णाने worn- 
out शरीराशि bodies बिहाय casting off अन्यानि others 
Talia new संयाति enters. 

Even as man casts off worn-out clothes, 
and puts on others which are new, so the em- 
bodied casts off worn-out bodies, and enters 
into others which are new. 

| As one only puts off the old, when one already 


possesses the new garment, so the embodied is 
already entering a new body in the act of leaving 


21-25 ] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE avi 


this. The Upznishad compares this to the move- 
ment of a leech, which has already established a 
new foothold before leaving the oid. 


aa रिन्दन्ति शस्त्राणि नेनं दहाति पावकः ॥ 


> 


ow ~ शोषयाति 
न ai क्ेदयन्त्यापों न शोषयति मारुतः ॥२३॥ 
IL. 23: 

शस्त्राणि weapons we this ( Self) न fafa cur 
वावकः fire एनं this q दहति burns not gq: waters एन्‌ 
this q क्लेदयन्ति wet not च and arga: wind न शोषर्यात 
dries not. 

This (Self), weapons cut not; This, Sre 
burns not; This, water wets not; and Tiis, 
wind dries not. 


WA SAAT A SAAS योष्शोष्य एव च ॥ 
नित्यः WANT: स्थाणुरचलोऽयं सनातन: ॥२४॥ 
IL. 24. 

अये This (Self) अच्छ्दः cannot be cut अयं ii~ 
अदाह्यः cannot be burnt अङ्कु: cannot be wetted 
अशोष्यः च एव and cannot also be dried Wa tlis 
faa: changeless सर्वगतः all-pervading rarer: u»- 
moving अचलः immovable सनातनः eternal. 

This Self cannot be cut, nor burnt, ner 
wetted, nor dried. Changeless, all-pervadiny, 
unmoving, immovable, the Self is Eternal. 


अव्यक्तोष्यमचिन्त्योध्यमविकार्योध्यमुच्यते ॥ 
तस्मादेवं विदित्वैनं नालुशोचिचिलुमहेसि xul 
EL. 25. 
अयं This (Self) अव्यक्तः unmanifested अये this 
saree: unthinkable अये this अविकार्यः unchangeable 
4 : 


3३ SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap. 2. 


उच्यते is said तस्मात्‌ therefore gå thus एने this विदित्वा 
knowing अनुशोचितुं to mourn न ग्रहेसि oughtest not. 

This (Self) is said to be unmanifested, un- 
thinkable, and unchangeable. Therefore, 
knowing This to be such, thou oughtest not to. 
mourn. है 


"The Self is infinite and partless, so can be 
neither subject nor object of any action.] 


A » P e P" e न्यसे ha 
अथ चेनं नित्यजातं नित्यं वा मन्यसे सतम्‌ d 
ex * - A o ~ € 
तथापि त्वं महावाहो नेनं शोचितुमहेसि ॥२६॥ 
IL. 26. 

अथ च But if छन this (Self) नित्यजातं constantly 
born faet constantly ay or सृतं dead मन्यसे thinkest 
नवापि even then महावाहों Mighty-armed, eq thou 
एन्‌ this शोचितुं to mourn न्‌ अर्शसि oughtest not. 

But if thou shouldst take This to have 
constant birth and death, even in that case, 
O mighty-armed, thou oughtest not to mourn 
ior This. 


_Krishna here, for the sake of argument, takes. 
up the materialistic supposition, and shows, that 
even if the Self were impermanent, sorrow ought to. 
be destroyed, since in that case there would be 
no hereafter, no sin, and no hell.] 


जातस्य हि भ्रुवो स्त्युभेवं जन्म सृतस्य च ॥ 
तस्मादपरिदार्येः्थे न त्वं शोचितुमहेसि ॥२७॥ 
IL 27. 
हि For जातस्य of that which is born मृत्यु: death 


W3: certain मृतस्य च and of that which is dead spur 
tini Wd certain तस्मात्‌ therefore अपरिहार्ये अर्थे in 


27-20] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 39 


» = yn + v Cm 

an unavoidable matter शोचितु to grieve न अदेसि 
^ 

ouvhtest not. 

Of that which is born, death is certain, of 
that which is dead, birth is certain. Over the 
unavoidable, therefore, thou oughtest not to 
grieve. 

{ This sloka concerns only those who are not 
vet free. So long as there is desire, birth and 
death are inevitable. 

Therefore thou oughiest nof lo grieve: Since you 
cannot control the inevitable and preserve the bodies 


of your relations, work out your own Karma and 
go beyond both birth and death. } 


अव्यक्तादीनि भूतानि व्यक्तमध्यानि भारत Il 


व्यक्तनिश्चनान्येच तत्र का परिदेवना Weal 
Il. 28. 

भारत Bharata भूतानि beings अ्रव्यक्ताटीनि un- 
manifested in the beginning व्यक्तमध्यानि manifested 
in the middie-state ग्रव्यक्तनिधनानि एव unmanifested 
again in the end qw there का what परिदेवना grief. 

All beings are unmanifested in their begin- 
ning, O Bharata, manifested in their middle- 
state and unmanifested again in their end. 
What is there then to grieve about? 


| Beings: ln their relationships as sons and 
friends, who are mere combinations of material 
elements, correlated as causes and effects. 

The idea here is that that which has no existence 
in the beginning and the end, must be merely 
illusory in the interim, and should not therefore be 
allowed to have any influence upon the mind. ] 


आश्वयेवत्पश्‍यति कश्चिदेन- 
माश्थयवद्धदाति तथेव चान्य: ॥ 


40. SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap. Z- 


आश्चवर्यवचचेनमन्यःश्टशोति . 
श्रुत्वाप्येनं वेद न चेव कश्चित ॥२६॥ 
IL. 29. 

कित Some one एनं this (Self) आश्रचयवत्‌ as ॐ 
sonder षृश्यति looks upon ततथा एव च्च and so also 
अन्य: another आश्रयेवत as a wonder वदति speak s. 
अन्य: च another again एने this आश्चर्यवत्‌ as a wonder 
spuma hears काश्चिद्‌ च and yet another शुत्वा' zd 
üouzh hearing gẹ this q एव वेद knows not at all. 

Some look upon the Self as marvellous. 
Others speak of It as wonderful. Others again. 
hear of It as a wonder And stil others, 
though hearing, do not understand Xt at all. 

" The sloka may also be interpreted in the sense 
inat those who see, hear and speak of the Self are 
"endertul men. because their number. is so few. 
It is not therefore remarkable that you shovid 


num, because the Auman is so difficult to compre- 
tend, 


देही नित्यमवध्योऽयं देहे सर्वस्य भारत d 
तस्मात्सवाणि भूतानि न त्वं शोचितुमहसि ॥३०॥ 
Il. 30. 
भारत Bharata अये this देही Indweller सतस्य of all 
दह in the body नित्यं ever अवध्यः indestructible 
तस्मात thereiore त्ये thou सर्वाणि all भूतानि beings 
शोचितुं 10 mourn न safa oughtest not. 

This, the Indweller in the bodies of all, is 
eer indestructible, O descendant of Bharata. 
Wherefore thou oughtest not to mourn for any 
Creature, 


Krishna here returns to His own point of view. 1 


+ 
» 


20-32 THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE AF 


waaay चावेक्ष्य न विकम्पितुमहेसि N 
धर्म्यांडि युद्धाच्ह्योऽन्यत्तत्रियस्य न विद्यते ॥३१॥ 
II 3. 

स्वधर्म Own Dharma अपि च and also अवेक्ष्य look- 
inga q not Api to waver Zefa oughtest हि 
for धर्म्यात्‌ युद्धात than a righteous war क्षुत्रियस्य of a 
Kshatriva अन्यत any other अरयः higher q विद्यत 
exists not, 

Looking at thine own Dharma, also, thou 
oughtest not to waver, for there is nothing 
higher for a Kshatriya than a righteous war. 

| That is to say, it is the duty of a Kshatriya to 
fiche in the interest of his country, people and 
religion. | 


FEA चोपपन्नं स्वरगद्वारमपाब्वतम्‌॥ 


e Š ह x चा E e 
Gaa: QAI: पाथ लभन्त युद्धमाहशम ॥३२॥ 
Il. 32: 
€ s . 2 > E 
पाथं Partha यहच्छया of itself उपपन्नं come अपावृत 
opened स्वर्गद्वार the gate of heaven इदृशं such युद्ध 
baule erga: happy afar: Esnatriyas = verily 
भन्ते gain. | 
Fortunate certainly are the Kshatriyas, O 
son of Pritha, who are called to fight in such 
a battle, that comes unsought as an open gate 
to heaven. 


अथ Beale ara संग्रामं न करिष्यासि ॥ 
ततः SIA कीति च हित्वा पापमवाप्स्यास॥३३॥ 


iL. 33. 
आथ चेत But if ep thou इमं this रम्यं righteous 
यामं warfare न करिष्यसि wouldst not do sqq: then 


42 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap. 2. 


enri own Dharma कीति च and honour हित्वा for- 
feiting पाष sin अ्रवाप्स्यासि shalt incur. 

But if thou refusest to engage in this 
righteous warfare, then, forfeiting thine own 
Dharma and honour, thou shalt incur sin. 


ex DO PN € os eo ~ 

अकात चाप भूतान कथायष्यःन्त तेध्व्ययाम ॥ 

+ ~ emt c on v». 
सभावतस्य चाकांतमरणादातांरच्यत ॥३४ी 

I... a 

आपि च And also भूतानि beings W of thee senat 
everlasting aga dishonour कथयित्यान्ते will tell 
संभावितस्य of the honoured spa: dishonour 
मरणात्‌ than death च्‌ surely अतिरिच्यते exceeds. 


The world also will ever hold thee in repro- 
bation. To the honoured, disrepute is surely 
worse than death. 


The present argument,—slokas 33-36.—assutnes 
that the cause in hand is already proyed to be the 
right. Hence it could only be from cowardice that 
Arjuna could abandon it. Evena hero may he 
weakened by the stirring of his deepest emotions. ; 


भयाद्रणादुपरतं मंस्यन्ते त्वां महारथाः d 


येषां च त्वं बहुमतो भूत्वा यास्यसि लाघवम ॥३५॥ 
M- अः. 
महारयाः च And the great chariot-warriors स्वा thee 
भयात्‌ from fear रणात from battle उपरतं withdrawn 
मेस्यन्ते will regard WT of those ex thou वहुमतः much- 
thought-of सूत्वा having been लाघव ‘lightness 
यास्यसि wilt receive. 


The great chariot-warriors* will believe that 





* Vide commentary I. 6. 


53-38] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE * 43 


thou hast withdrawn from the battle through 
fear. And thou wilt be lightly esteemed by 
them who have thought much of thee. 


अवाच्यवादांश्च वहुन्वदिष्यान्ति तवाहिताः ॥ 
निन्दन्तस्तव सामथ्ये ततो दुःखतरं g किम्‌ ॥३६॥ 
t SL 36: 

aq Thine अहिताः च enemies also तव thy सामर्थ्य 
prowess faezeq: cavillng वहून many अवाच्यवादान्‌ 
unutterable things afesafeq will say ततः than this 
waat more painful नु कि what (could be). 

Thine enemies also, cavilling at thy great 
prowess, will say of thee things that are not to 
be uttered. What could be more intolerable 
than this? 


हतो वा पराप्स्यसि खर्गे जित्वा वा भोक्ष्यसे महीम 
तस्मादुत्तिष्ठ कोन्तेय युद्धाय कृतनिश्चयः ॥३७॥ 
Ik ‘57. 

इतः Slain वा स्वर्गे heaven प्राप्स्यसि gainest जित्वा 
conquering वा महीं earth भोक्ष्यसे enjoyest तस्मात्‌ 
therefore कोन्तेय son of Kunti युद्धाय for fight कृतनिश्चय: 
resolved fag arise. 

Dying thou gainest heaven; conquering 
thou enjoyest the earth, Therefore, O son of 
Kunti, arise, resolved to fight 


gazia सम कृत्वा लाभालाभा जयाजया | 
सता युद्धाय युज्यस्व नव पापमवाप्स्यास ४३१०) 
II. 38 
सुखदुःखे pain and pleasure समे the same pA 
having made ल्लाभालाभी gain and loss saraat 


44 . SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 2. 


conquest and defeat qq: then युद्धाय for battle 

युज्यस्व be ready एवं thus पार्षं sin q not अवाप्स्यसि 
e 

shalt incur. 


Having made pain and pleasure, gain and 
loss, conquest and defeat, the same, engage 
thou then in battle. So shalt thou incur no 
sin, ५ | | 

-It is always the desire for one of the pairs oi 
the opposites that binds. When an act is done 
without attachment either for itself or its fruit, then 
Karma can be worked out without adding to its 
store, and this leads to Freedom. ] 


- 6s 9 प] aea es . 
एषा तेऽभिहिता सांख्ये बुद्धियोगे त्विमां शटणु ॥ 
kS ge + ~ 
बुद्धया युक्तो यया पार्थ कमवन्यं प्रहास्यस्ति ॥३६॥ 
IL. 36: 

सांख्ये In regard to Self-realisation एषा this बुद्धिः 
wisdom ते to thee अभिदिता declared योगे तु but in 
regard to Yoga इमां it jar hear वार्थं Partha यया 
with which agar teaching aR: united कमेवन्थे 
bondage of Karma प्रहास्यसि shalt break through. 

The wisdom of Self-realisation has been 
declared unto thee. Hearken thou now to 
Yoga, following which, O son of Pritha, thou 
shalt break through the bonds of Karma. 

| Pega :—Karma Yoga, or that plan of conduct 
which secures the working out of past Karma ; 
non-accumulation of new; and the striving for 
Selt-realisation with the whole of the will. In this 
discipline, one’s sole object in life is Self-realisation ; 
hence no importance is attached to anything else. 
‘Thus all actions are performed without attachment, 


Or care for results. So no new Karma is made: 
only the already accumulated is exhausted. And 


38-40] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 45 


at the same time, the whole will 1s left free to devote 
itself to the achievement of Self-realisation alone. 

In the precéding slokas, rr—25, Krishna had 
given the point of view of the highest knowledge, 
the ancient Brahmajnana. In the 26th and 27th we 
have a purely materialistic stand-point. Slokas, 28 
to 37, give the attitude of a man of the world. In 
the 38th we have an anticipation of the Yoga. And 
in whatis to fo¥ow, we have Sri Krishna's own 
contribution to the philosophy of life. | 


नेहाभिक्रमनाशो$स्ति प्रत्यवायो न विद्यते ॥ 


टपमप्यस्य THEA त्रायते महतो भयात ॥७०॥ 
JL. 40. 


इह Inthis अभिक्रमनाश: waste of attempt न अस्ति is 
not gaara: ( च and) production of contrary results 
न विद्यते exists not eq धर्मस्य of this Dharma 
exeq very little अपि even महतः भयात्‌ from great 
terror ब्रायते protects. 


In this, there is no waste of the unfinished 
attempt, nor is there production of contrary 
results, Even very little of this Dharma protects 
from the great terror. 


[ Waste of the unfinished attempt: A religious 
rite or ceremony, performed for a definite object, 
if left uncompleted, is wasted, like a house unroofed 
which is neither serviceable nor enduring. In 
Karma Yoga, however, that is, action. and worship 
performed without desire, this law does not apply, 
for every effort results in immediate purification 
of the heart. Production of contrary results: In 
worship for an object, any imperfection in the 
process produces positive loss instead of gain. So 
in cases of sickness, the non-use of the right 
medicine results in death. Zhe great terror: Bee 
ing caught in the wheel of birth and death. ] 


46 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA _ [ Chap. 2. 


व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिरेकेह कुरुनन्दन ॥ 


बहुशाखा ह्यनन्ताश्च बुद्धयो$व्यवसायिनाम ॥४१॥ 
IL 41, 

कुरुनन्दन Son of Kuru इह in this च्यवसायास्मिका 
set एका single ( एव only ) बुद्धि: determination ग्रव्यवसा- 
यिनां of the undecided qu purposes वहुशाखाः 
many-branching = and अ्रनन्ताः innumerable, 

In this,O son of Kuru, there is set determi- 
nation towards one goal. The purposes of 
the undecided are innumerable and many- 
branching. 


(In Karma Yoga, the one goal is Self-realisa- 
tion. The undecided (that is, about the highest), 
naturally devote themselves to lower ideals, no one 
of which can satisfy. Thus they pass from plan 


to plan. | 
यामिमां पुष्पितां वाचं प्रवदन्त्यविपश्चितः ॥ 
वेदवादरताः पाथे नान्यदस्तीतिवादिनः॥४२॥ 
कामात्मानः स्वगेपरा जन्मकमेफलप्रदाम्‌ ॥ 
कियाविशेषबहुलां भोगेश्वयेर्गात प्रति ॥४३॥ 
भोगेश्वयेप्रसक्तानां तयापहृतचेतसाम्‌ | 
व्यवसायास्मिका बुद्धि: समाधी न विधीयते ॥४४॥ 
Mle dae mea 


पार्थ O Partha आविपश्चितः the unwise वेदवादरताः 
satished with the panegyric statements of tke Vedas 
अन्यत्‌ anything else q Wiley does not exist 
इति this वादिनः declaring कामात्मानः full of desires 
VERDI: with heaven as their highest goal याम्‌ which 
zat this (well-known) पुष्पितां flowery जन्सकमफल- 


41-44] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE AG 


sera leading to (new) births as the result of their 
works भौगेश्वर्यनातं प्रति for the attainment of pleasure 
and power क्रियाविशेषवहलां exuberant with various 
specific actions apy word प्रवदन्ति expatiate upon 
भोगेशवयेप्रसक्तानां 0. (people) deeply attached to 
pleasure and power तया by that spyge qut with 
their discrimination stolen away व्यवसायात्मिका set 
ate determination समाधी in the mind न विधीयते is 
not formed. 

O Partha, no set determination is formed 
in the minds of those that are deeply attached 
to pleasure and power, and whose diserimina- 
tion is stolen away by the flowery words of 
the unwise, who are full of desires and look 
upon heaven as their highest goal and who. 
being perfectly satisfied with the panegyric 
words of the Vedas, declare that there is 
nothing else. Their (flowery) words are 
exuberant with various specific rites as the 
means to pleasure and power and are the 
causes of (new) births as the result of their 
works ( performed with desire ) 

[ Samddhi has been rendered inte mind m the 
above. The generally accepted significance of the 
term ( absorption in God-consciousness produced 
by deep meditation } would give an equally consist- 
ent and happy meaning: Persons attached io 


pleasure and power cannot have perfect steadiness 
of mind in divine meditation 


Panegyric words of the Vedas: The Karma 
Anda or the sacrificial portion of the Vedas which 
lays down specific rules for specifie actions and their 
fruits. Nothing else: Beyond the heavenly enjoy- 
ments procurable by the sacrificial ines ofthe Vedas. | 


48 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | Chap. 2. 


अशुण्यविषया वेदा निखेशुशयो भवाझुन d 
Raa नित्यसत्वस्थो निर्योगचेम आत्मवान्‌ ॥४५९॥ 
IL. 45. 

वेदाः The Vedas ्रैगुणयादिषयाः deal with the three 
Gunas अजुन Arjuna (स्वं thou) Ranua: tree from 
the triad of Gunas भव be fqgeg: fret from the pairs 
ot opposites नित्यसत्वस्यः ever balanced निर्योगत्षेमः 
free from getting and keeping areara established 
inthe Self. 

The Vedas deal with the three Gunas. Be 
thou free, Q Arjuna, from the triad of the 
Gunas, free from the pairs of opposites, ever- 
balanced, free from {the thought of) getting 
aud keeping, and established in the Self, 

| Lhe Vedas deal with: That is to say. the Vedas 
treat of relativity. Pairs of opposites: Dzanda, all 


correlated ideas and sensations, e. g., good and bad, 
pleasure and pain, heat and cold, light and dark- 
ness etc. 

Gana is & technical term of the Sankhya philo- 
sophy: also used in the same sense by the Vedanta. 
Prakriti or Nature is constituted of three Gunas: 
Sattva ६ equilibrium ), Rajas (attraction ), Tamas 
( inertia | Prakriti is the three Gunas, zoz that she 
4a: them. Guna is wrongly translated as quality ; it 
is substance as wellas quality, matter azd force. 
Wherever there is name and iorm, there is Guna. 
Guna also means a rope, that which binds. | 


यावानथे उदपाने सरवतः सेप्रतोदके > 


NA 


वावान्सर्वेबु वेदेषु त्राह्मणस्य विजानतः ॥४६॥ 
IL. 46. 


सर्वतः everywhere SEDILE] being flooded उदपाने 


45-47 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 49 


in a reservoir आदान as much अर्थ: use विजानतः of 
the knowing ब्रौह्यणास्य Bráhmana सर्वेषु 11 21] देदेषु the 
Vedas qrara so much ( use ). 


Li 
To the Brahmana who has known the Sel f, 
all the Vedas are of so much use as a 
reservoir is, when there is a flood everywhere. 
® 
LA man possessed of Self-knowledge has no 
need whatever of the Vedas. This does not, 
however, mean that the Vedas are useless; only to 
the knower of Brahman they have no value, as the 


transient pleasures derivable from them are compre- 
hended in the infinite bliss of Self-knowledge. ] 


कमेण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा WAY कदाचन | 
मा कमेफलहेतुभूमो ते सङ्गोऽस्त्वकर्मशि ॥४७॥ 
i. qs 
कर्मणि In work एव only ते thy अधिकारः right 
कदाचन ever RAY in fruits मा not कर्मफलहेतुः the 
producer of the results of acts मा az: shouldst not be 


अकर्मणि in inaction ते thy सङः attachment gp not 
अस्तु let be. 


Thy right is to work only ; but never to the 
fruits thereof. Be thou not the producer of 
the fruits of (thy) actions; neither let thy 
attachment be towards inaction. 

[Be thou not the producer Cc, That is, do not 
work with any desire for results, for actions produce 
fruits Or bondage only if they are performed with 
desire. 

Karma primarily means action, but a much 
profounder meaning has come to be attached to 
this word. It means the destiny forged by one in 
ones past incarnation or present; the store of 


20 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap.2 


tendencies, impulses, characteristics, and habits 
laid by, which determines the futuré embodiment, 
environment and the whole of one's organisation. 


Another meaning of Karma often used in 
reference to one's caste or position in life, is duty, 
iiie course of conduct which one ought to follow 
in pursuance of the tendencies which one acquired 
in one's past, with a view to work them out and 
regain the pristine purity of the Self. | 


योगस्थः कुरु कमोरि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा TANT ॥ 

Can La ~ ~ १) `” he 

TARA: समा भूत्वा समत्व यांग उच्यत eSI 
II. 48. 

घनंज्ञय Dhananjaya योगस्थ: steadfast in Yoga सङ्ग 
attachment qgar abandoning Rer in re- 
gard to success and failure सम: the same wear being 
कमाशि actions कुरु perform समत्व evenness of mind 
{in regard to success and failure ) योग: Yoga उच्यते 
1s called. 

Being steadfast in Yoga, O Dhananjaya, 
perform actions, abandoning attachment, 
remaining unconcerned as regards success and 
failure. This evenness of mind (in regard to 
success and failure) is known as Yoga. 


चरण ह्यवर कम वाद्धयागाद्धनज़य || 
Sal शरयणामान्वच्छ BINT: फलहंतव: ॥४६॥ 
E. 49. 
थनेजय Dhananjaya हिं as बुद्धियोगात्‌ than work 
performed with the mind undisturbed by thoughts 


of results tq by far s work अवर inferior 
aar In evenness of mind शरणं refuge fae seek 
फलहेतवः seekers after results qat: wretched, 


47-51] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 51 


Work (with desire) is verily far inferior to 
that performed with the mind undisturbed by 
thoughts of results. O Dhananjaya, seek 
refuge in this evenness of mind. Wretched 
are they who act for results. 


बुद्धियुक्तो जह7तीह उभे सुकृतदुष्कृते ॥ 
तस्माद्योगाय युज्यस्व योगः RAD HATA ॥५०॥ 
IL 50. 

बुद्धियुक्तः Endued with evenness of mind gz in this 
(life) उभे both सुकृतदुष्कृते virtue and vice जहाति casts 
off तस्मात therefore योगाय to Yoga युज्यस्व devote 
thyself योग: Yoga aye in work कौशल dexterity. 

Endued with this evenness of mind, one 
frees oneself in this life, alike from vice and 
virtue. Devote thyself, therefore, to this Yoga. 
It is the very dexterity of work. 

[ Alike from vice and virtue: A follower of 
Karma Yoga can have no personal motive for any 


action. Our action without motive becomes colour- 
less, loses its character of vice or virtue. 


Dexterity of work: (tis the nature of work to 
produce bondage. Karma Yoga is the dexterity 
of work because it not only robs work of its power 


to bind, but also transforms it into an efficient 
means of freedom. | 


कमेजं बुद्धियुक्ता हि फलं त्यक्त्वा मनीषिणः di 
जन्मबन्धविनिसुक्ताः पदं गच्छन्त्यनामयम्‌ ॥५१॥ 
Ib. डा. 


बुद्धियुक्ता: Possessed of evenness of mind मनीषिणः 
the wise कर्मजं फलं fruit of action तक्त्वा abandoning 


~~ © 


नज्नन्मवन्धविनिसुक्ताः freed from the fetters of birth 


t 


* 
क 
ia 


SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap. 2. 


imma bevond evil पदे state हि verily गच्छन्ति go. 

Tae wise, possessed of this evenness of mind, 
abandoning the fruits of their actions, freed 
forever from the fetters of birth, go to that 


"e 


state whichis bevond all evil 


यदा ते मोहर्काललं वद्धिव्यतितरिष्याति ॥ 


नदा गन्तास [नवद श्रातव्यस्य श्वतस्य च ॥९२॥ 
Ils 52: 

यदा Wien ते thy apg: intellect मोरकालिले taint of 
. uon व्यतितरिष्यति crosses beyond तदा. then 
खातब्यस्यथ £? what is to be heard मतस्य च and of what 
; heard निर्वेदं indifference गन्ता gfe thou shalt 
cdm 

When thy intellect crosses beyond the taint 
(T illusion, then shalt thou attain to in- 
diference, regarding things heard and yet to 
be heard, 

. Iu ‘aint of uiusion : the identifying of the Self 
on « wile ero 


kJ 
CE _, म्य, 
abd a te 


*& 
E 

ron 

fe 

Ll * 
$ 


थृतिविप्रतिपन्ना ते यदा स्थास्यति निश्चला ॥ 
समाधावचला दुद्धिस्तदा योगमवाप्स्यसि ॥५३॥ 
Hi a 

यदा When ते thy श्वुतिवियतिपन्ना tossed about bv 

evi Or opinions बुद्धि: intellect अचला firmly 
aablished समाधो in the Self emaa will be तदा 
५-7 ORT Sev-realisation अवाप्स्यांस shalt attain 

When thy intellect, tossed about by the 
conflict of opinions—has become firmly estab- 


lished in the Self then thou shalt attain Self- 
realisation, 


p" 
gn 
p 


wo f 


> 
(हि 


३1-५५ | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 


MHA उवाच ॥ 
स्थित्रज्ञस्य का भाषा समाथिस्यस्य केशव N 
स्थिती: कि प्रभाषेत किमासीत asta किम ॥५४॥ 
id बड], 

अजुन उवाच Arjuna said: 

केशव Keshava “स्थितप्रज्ञस्थ of the ( man of ) steady 
wisdom समाविस्थलत्य of the (man) merged in 
Samad r what भाषा description स्थितधी* (the 
man of) steady wisdom कि what प्रभाषेत speaks 
fa what (how) rafa sits व्हि what (how) wae 


Wa | ] cS. 





Arjuna said : 

What, O Keshava, is the description of the 
man of steady wisdom, merged in Samadhi? 
How (on the other hand) does the man of 
steady wisdom speak, how sit, how walk ? 


| Arjuna is asking ( 1) what is the state of the 


mind of the man of realisation when in Samadhi, 
and (2) how is its influence shown in his conduct 
when out of it? 

Steady wisdom: Settled conviction of one’s 
identity with Brahman gained by direct realisation ]. 


भ्रीभगवानुवाच॥ 


प्रजहाति यदा कामान्सवोन्पाथे मनोगतान्‌ di 
आत्मम्येचात्मना gu: स्थितभक्ञस्तदोच्यते ॥५५॥ 
e ese 
शरीभगवान उवाच The Blessed Lord said: 
पार्थं Partha यदा when सर्वान्‌ all मनोगतान of the 
mind कामान्‌ desires spspgrfq casts off आत्मनि एत्र 


in the Self alone ग्रात्मना by the Self qz: satisfied 
5 


pe 


54 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 2, 
तदा then Ryana: of steady wisdom उच्यते is said. 
The Blessed Lord said: 
When a man, completely casts away, O 
Partha! all the desires of the mind, satisfied 
in the Self alone by the Self, then, is he said 


to be one of steady wisdom. 
L This answers the first part of Arjuna’s question. 


M 


has € w ~ 
दुःखष्वनुङससनचाः Say [वगतस्पह: d 
ex ~ LU a Lien च्यते ~ 
STATA STS. PAT ATT AS Well 
Ile- ३0, 
दुःखेषु In adversity afgaat: of unshaken mind 
way in happiness faaqers: without longing 
वौंतराराभयन्कोथः free from affection, fear and wrath 
Sf: Muni स्यितर्वी: of steady wisdom उच्यते is said. 
He whose mind is not shaken by“adversity, 
nor made thirsty by happiness, who has be- 
come free from affection, fear, and wrath, he 
is indeed the munz of steady wisdom. 
| This and the following two slokas answer the 
second part of Arjuna's question, as to the conduct 
of one of perfect realisation. 
Mun: Man of meditation }. 


यः सवेत्रानभिसनेहस्तत्तत्प्राप्य शुभाशुभम ॥ 
नासिनन्दति न द्वेष्टि तस्य sur प्रतिष्टिता dsl 
H. 57. 
यः Who सर्व everywhere अनभिल्लेहः without 
attachment qq तत. whatever grat good and evil 
प्राप्य receiving न अभिनन्दाते does not rejoice न द्वेष्टि 
is not vexed qx his प्रज्ञा wisdom प्तिशिता is fixed. 


^ om 


5-30 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 5 


He who is everywhere unattached, not 
१ 1 P a ‘a a | 
pivased at receiving good, ner vexed at evil, 


bis wisdom is fixed 


«Yod pleased ८.० consequently he does not 
praise or blaine. ‘This is in answer to the query: 
^ How does he speak?” | 


x - Ya ~ e € 

यदा संहरते चायं कूर्मोंष्ड़ानीव सवशः ॥ 

o> ^om es y ex 0 
इन््रयायाणान्ट्रयाथक््यस्तर्य AAT ATAT EAT WISH 

Il. ‘56, 

war When «p also अय this ( Yogi} md tortoise 
आनि limbs ga like gegara: irom sense-objects 
sigari senses सवश: completely gaq withdraws 
aeg his प्रज्ञा wisdom प्रतिडिता is steadied. 


When also, like the tortoise its limbs, he 
can completely withdraw the senses from their 
objects, thea his wisdom becomes steady. 

Withdraw the senses: bring the mind back up- 


on ihe Self from all sense-obiects. This is known 
as predgydhdra in Yoga. 


To explain the sloka more fully: a man of the 
highest realisation can, at any moment, shake 
himself clear of all impressions of the sense-world 
and go into Samádhi, with the ease and natural- 
ness of a tortoise drawing its limbs within itself. ] 


विषया विनिवतेन्ते निराहारस्य देहिन:॥ 
taai रसोऽप्यस्य परं eur feu ॥५६॥ 
IIL. 9 


निराहरस्य Of the abstinent देदिनः of the man 


विषयाः objects विनिवचेन्ते [001 away रसवर्ज leaving the 
longing (qt but) qx the Supreme ZST having seen 
अस्य of this (man of settled wisdom) शसः longing 
आपि even निवतेते falls away. 


58 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 2, 


first breaths of thought, that come sofily and alinost 
unconsciously to the mind. |] T 


oer A A eM C 
रागळूबावर्यक्तर्त STAN AA ॥ 
आत्मवश्येविश्वेयात्मा प्रसादसाधिगच्कति nazi 

ji. G4. 

तु But रागद्वेबवियुर्ः free fron? attraction and 
aversion आत्मचरथु: selt-restrained हम्ह: with senses 
वषयान objects aqa moving (amongst) fear 
the self-controlled gga tranquility आर्विगच्छाति 
attains. 

But the seif-controlled man, moving among 
objects with senses under restraint, and free 
from attraction and aversion attains to 
tranguilty. 

The above is in answer to Arjuna’s fourth 
question, ^ How does he move ?" 5 


प्रसादे स्वेदुःखानां हानिरस्योपजायते N 
प्रसक्षचेतसो झाश वुद्धि: पर्यवतिष्ठत ew" 
lL १5. 

प्रसादे In tranquility अस्य of him «dau of all 
sorrows IW: destruction उपजायले happens gea- 
JAQ: of the tranquil-minded f& because आहु sco 
बुद्धिः intellect पर्यवतिष्ठते is established in firmness. 

in tranquility, all sorrow is destroyed. Por 
the intellect, of him who js tranquil- minded, is 
soon established in firmness. i 

( That is, firmly concentrates itself on the Self. | 


नास्ति बुद्धिरयुक्तस्य न चायुक्तस्य भावना di 
न चाभावयत: शान्तिरशान्तस्य कुतः WaT ॥६६॥ 


63-68] THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 2d 


II. 66. 

agere Of the unsteady gf: knowledge (of the 
Self) नास्ति has not अयुक्तस्य oi the unsteady भावना 
meditation w= also * not अजावयत: च and of the un- 
meditative शान्ति: peace न not अ्रशाइन्तस्य of ihe 
peaceless @w@ happiness कुवः whence. 

No knowledge (of the Self) has the un- 
steady. Nor has he meditation. To the un- 
meditative there is no peace. And how can 
one without peace have happiness? 


इल्द्रियाणा हि चरतां aeaatsgrratad ॥ 
तदस्य हर्रति प्रज्ञां वाथुर्नावमिवाम्ससि ॥६७॥ 
IL 67. 


fe For «mgr wandering इन्द्रियाणा senses यच्‌ w hich 
aq: mind यआ्नविधीयते follows तत that स्थ his 
apg: wind अम्भसि in water नाव boat इव like प्रज्ञा 
discrimination हश scatters 

For, the mind which follows in the wake of 
the wandering senses, carries away his dis- 
crimination, as a wind (carries away from its 
course ) a boat on the waters. 


तस्थाचस्य महावाहो निग्रहीतानि सवश: ॥ 
इन्द्रियाशीन्द्रियार्थिभ्यस्तस्य TAT भ्रतिष्टिता tes 
i. 68. 
azrarar Mighty -armed तस्मात्‌ therefore यस्य whose 
इन्द्रियाणि senses इन्द्रियाथन्य from sense-objects 


सर्वशः completely निशदहीतान restrained तस्य his प्रज्ञा 
knowledge sagt 15 assimilated 


Therefore, O mighty-armed, he whose senses 


60 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap.2. 


are compietely restrained from their objects, 
his knowledge is steady ` 
This does not mean that the senses remain 


completely estranged, but that they are all estrang 
able at will, | 


~ e सूः : > + ex E sT 
या नशा सवभतांना तस्या जागात SAAT ॥ 

TE ` amare C भूत m £S s Ses = * e 
यस्या जागात एच AT एनया परयता सुन. Neel 

Ii. 00. 

c - > = an i: z » 

सदंसूतावा Of all beings या what निशा night संयमी 
the self-controlled gem in that जागात keeps awake 
gear in what wera all beings ज्ञाति are awake 
वृण्यतः the Self- ) seeing ga: of the Muni सा that 
विरा night. 

That which is night to all beings, in that 
the sel£-controlled man wakes. That in which 
all beings wake, is night to the self-seeing 
Muni. 

Where all beings are in darkness, there th 
Mun 5३९06५. ARU Pce CELE 1 ne CORSCIOLSMess OF 
the man or realisation is so full of God that be 
annot see anvihing apart trom Him. The ignorant 
man, on ihe otner nand, lives In the world of 
plurality alone and God is a non-entity to him. 


It follows, that non-susceptibilitv to the influences 
of Nature, that is. perfect self-control ( spoken ot 
t 


in the preceding sioka (is quite as natural a ira 
of the illumined soul as its opposite is ot t 
ignorant. _ 


आपूयसाशमचलघतिष्ट 

agzat: प्रविशन्ति uz tl 
तद्धत्कामा यं प्रविशन्ति सर्च 

स regata कामकामी sell 


68-72 | THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE 61 


IH we 
* in . 

यहूता As आपएयमाणएं filled from all sides gaa- 
प्रतिष्ठ based in stillness समुह ocean आप: water 
प्रविशन्ति enter qga so सर्वे all व्यापाः desires ये 
which ( gfa Muni) प्रतविशान्ति enter स he mfy peace 
STATA attains WEARI desirer OL doslres «qp not 

As into the ocean,—brimful, and «till, —fow 
the waters, even so the Muni into whom enter 
all desires, he, and not the desiter of desiies, 
attains to peace, 

| The ocean is not at all affected by ‘he waters 
flowing into it from all sides. Similarly, that man 
alone finds true peace in whom no reaction of 
desire 13 produced by the obiects of enjoyment 


which he happens to come across duiing his 
sojourn on earth. | 


~ PRP Tz i ncc zT £ Tio 
वदाय कामान्य: सवान्पुनश्थरात STE: d 
em ९ . m~ 


नमसा TACT RIC: स शान्तमावगच्छॉत meu 
lio का. 
rey c ~ ~ 3 

यः Tiat gare man mq all rarer desires विजार 
abandoning लिफ्ट: devoul af longing favum 
Without the sense of l` fase: without the sense 
of ‘mine’ चराति moves (lives) zt he शान्ति peace 
आधिगच्छालि attain 

That man who lives devoid of longing, 
abandoning all desires, without the sense of 
‘P’ aud * mine,’ he attains to peace 

"^ 

L The man whs Dres-—merely to work out his 

past Karma. | 


a E P iu TC E Freee - 
WIT SIES स्थल: पाय नया NI PICO d 
z m e E 


स्थित्यास्यामच्तकालप STAT NSS ॥७२॥ 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


* 
॥ तृतीयोऽध्यायः dH 
THIRD CHAPTER 


अजुन उवाच ॥ 
z aN e > £o 0€ - 
ज्यायसी चत्कमशारत AAT FTAA | 
arek कसार घोर भा नयाजयास करव deu 
[Ee i 
BAA sare Arjuna said: 

नादेन Janardana केशव Keshava a if कभणः to 
action qw: know ledge ज्थाथर्सt superior है by thee 
xar considered ga then एकि why gre terrible summa 
in acuon AT nie नियाजयास engagest. 

Arjuna said: 

If, O Janardana, according to Thee, knowl- 
edge is superior to action, why then, O 
Keshava, dost Thou engage me in this teiribie 
action? 


व्याभिझशेशोत वाक्येन wu मोहयसीय स ॥ 
तदेकं वद निश्चित्य येन श्रयोष्हमापुयासम ॥२॥ 


IIl. 3$. 
sara Conflicting बहेन with words इव 


gu 


seemingly में my gg understanding मोरयासे art- 


2-6 | THE WAY OF ACTION 65 


II 


x © 
पुरुष: person RAN 


reo 
a 


4. 
of works gpayceate from 
nou-perlormance asara worklessness wq not spay 


^ cU 


reaches "चे and सन्यस ताव froin giving up ya meirch 
fate perfection q not सभावेगख्छाते attains, 

Without performing work none reaches 

^ ivy . 
worklessness; bv merelv giving up action no 
one attains to perfection. 

[ Wor&lessuess and perfection : These are synons- 
mous terms meaning. becoming one with the 
Inhnie and free all ideas of want, <A man who 
has reached this state can have no necessity or 
desire for work as a means to an end. Perfect 
satlsiactlon in the Self is his natural condition, 


yas: 0 0 Ey 


— 
नाइ काश्चत्कथासाप जाते Pneu i 
HA GAT: कम सवे: THTAS WW: diu 
HL 5: 

जातु Ever erat for an instant पि even कश्चित 
any one RAHA without performing action q not 
हि verily तिष्ठति rests f& for प्रक्विनेः born of Prakriti 

EN G c 2 c 
war: by the Gunas सर्वे: all अदशः helpless कामं action 
काथते is made to do. 

Verily none can ever rest for even an 
instant, without performing action; for all 
are made to act, helplessly indeed, by the 
Gunas, born of Prakriti. 


ll? are made fo act: All men living under 
bondage. ] 


HUTA संयम्य य आस्ते मनसा स्मरन्‌ ॥ 
इस्द्रियाथोन्वि्ूढात्मा मिथ्याचारः स उच्यते tel 


56 SRIMAD-BIAGAVAD-GITA [Cha 


111... t, 
युः Who कानान्ड्रयाशि organs of action संयम्य 


Lem 


restraining मनसा by the mind fgata sense- 

tx q he बिसुडास्मा 
oi deluded understanding मिथ्याचारः hypocrite 
उच्यत्‌ 15 धः lied 


objects WIT remembering आस्ते 


He, who restraining the otgans of action, 
sits revolving in the mind, thoughts regarding 
objects of senses, he of deluded understanding, 
is called a hypocrite. 


SII 


à 


करमान्द्रथे: क 


नसा नियम्यारभतेष्छुन ॥ 


पोगससतक्त:ः स विशिष्यते ॥७॥ 
18 EE 
अजुन Aruna थः who तु but इन्द्रियाणि senses 
मनसा br the mind famem controllino saag: un- 
attached sHfemW: by the organs of action zm 
path of work आरनते follows स he विशिष्यते excels. 


49 


XT 
e 
a 


But, who controlling the senses by the 
mind. unattached, directs his organs of action 
to the path of work, he, (2 Arjuna, excels. 
नियतं HE कमे त्वं कमे ज्यायो झकर्मशः N 
शरीरयात्रांप च ते न पसि घ्येदकमशः ॥८॥ 
I. 8. 

त्वे Thou नियमं obiicatorv a action कुछ perform 
हि for अकमशः 10 inaction कर्म action ज्याय: superior 
अकर्मणः iof the inactive ते thy ,णराण्याचा 
maintenance oi the body आवि even च and q not 
प्रासध्यत्‌ would be possible. 


Do thou perform obligatory* action ; for 





* See comment on V. 13. 


= 


6-10 ] THE WAY OF ACTION 6 


action is superior to inaction, and even the 
bare maintenance of thy body would not be 
possible if thou art inactive. 


यज्ञाय व्कमेणोऽन्यञ AST HAA ITA: ॥ 


तद्ये end कौन्तेय GHATS: समाचर ॥६॥ 
° ग. ads 
qarata For the sake of Yajna कमरा: of action 
अन्यन्न otherwise spp this लोक world कभवन्थनः 
bound by action arga Kounteya ( ञ्जः therefore) 
तदर्थ for that मुक्तसङ्गः devoid of attachment ax 
action gata perform. 


The world is bound by actions other than 
those performed for the sake of Yajna ; do thou 
therefore, O son of Kunti, perform action for 
Yajna alone, devoid of attachment. 

[ Yajna: means a religious rite, sacribce, wor- 
ship: Or an action done with a good or spiritual 
motive. It also means the Deity. ‘Phe Taittirtya- 
Samhita (I. 7, 4.) says, ^ Yajna is Vishnu Him- 
self." | 
सहयश्ञा: प्रजा: GET पुरोवाच प्रजापतिः ॥ 
अनेन असविष्यध्वमेष वोषस्त्विशरकामचुक्‌ ॥१०॥ 

III. 10. | 
पुरा In the beginning प्रज्ञापातिः the Prajápati 
सदया together with Yajna प्रजा: mankind Wer 
having created उवाच said अनेन by this YASNA, 
shall (ye) multiply mw: this q: your gEwD um 
milch cow of desires seq. let be. 

The Prajapati having in the beginning, 

created mankind together with Yajna, said, 


65 RIMAL-PIAGAVAD-GITA Chap. 3 


—^* By this shall ve multiply : this shall be the 
F 


milch cow of vour deires. 


= T a A E Zia 32 3 “9 4 z 
Prep रसना) creator or Brahma. | 


देवार्भावयतानेन ते देवा मावयन्त बः ॥ 
परस्पर यावयन्तः शयः परसवाप्स्यय deed 
DE pa ex 

gag Wih this देवाव the Devas भावयत cherish से 
these war: Devas वः vou भावयन्त may cherish पशस्परं 
ene antier wTESEW: cherishiug gt highest श्रेय: good 
gag SE arn 

“Cherish the Devas with this, and may those 
Devas cherish vou: thus cherishing oue 
another, ve shall gain the highest 09000 


* 


Deras: lit the shining ones) beings much 
ui;her than man in che scale of evolution, who are 
in charge of cosmic functions. | 


इप्टान्सोगान्ह वो देवा दास्यन्ते यज्ञभाविताः ॥ 
तेदतानअदाये क्यों यो भुऊक्ते स्तेन एव स: ॥१९॥ 


lb. 8 

देवा: The Devas यहुमाविता: cherished by Yajna 
Tara cesired-tor भागाने objects बः to vou apige 
Will ive iz 50 W bv them दत्तान given Tey: to them 
अप्रदाय without oierinz sp who weg enjoys सः he 
स्तन iei एव verily. 

"The Devas cherished bv Yajna, will giv 
vou desired-for objects.” So, he who enjoys 
objects given by the Devas without offering 
| in return | to them, is verily a thief. 
यक्षशिष्टाशिनः सन्तो सुच्यन्ते सवेकिल्चिषेः ॥ 


झुङ्जते ते त्वघं पापा ये पचन्त्यात्मकारणात्‌॥१३॥ 


(7 


10-14] THE WAY OF ACTION 69 


HI. 75. 


यङ्ञाशटाशिनः Hating the remnants of Yajna सन्त 
the good सवोकिल्विषेः from all sins मुच्यन्ते are freed 
थे who g but ञ्राव्मकारणात्‌ for themselves पचन्ति 
cook ले they पापा: sinful ones 374 sin Wad eat. 
The good, eating the remnants of Vajna, 
are freed from all sins: but who cook food 
(only) for themselves, those sinful ones, eat sin. 
| Deva-Fajna: offering sacrifices to the gods 
Brahma-Jajna : teaching and reciting the Scriptures 
Piri-l'ajna: offering libations of water to one's 
ancestors, iVri-Fajna, the feeding of the hunere 
and Pruta-Fajna, the feeding of the lower animals 
—are the five daily duties enjoined on householders 
The performance of these duties, frees them from 
the five-fold sin, inevitable to a householder’s life 
due to the killing of life, from the use of (1) the 
pestle and mortar, (2) the grinding-stone, (3) the 
oven, (4) the water-jar, and (5) the broom. ] 


अक्नाकूवन्ति भूतानि पजन्यादन्नसस्भवः॥ 


e. ~ e 
AIRAA THAT यज्ञः कमेसमुद्धवः NUN 
111, 14. 
भूतानि Beings sara from food भवान्ति come forth 
पर्जन्यात्‌ from rain HAGANA: production of food 
पर्जन्यः rain agra from Yajna भत्राति arises यज्ञ 
Yajna कमेसमुङ्कवः born of Karma 
From food come forth beings: from rain 
food is produced : from Yajna arises rain and 
Yajna is born of Karma, 


| Fajna: Here it denotes not the sacrificial deeds 
themselves but the subtle principle, into which they 
are converted, after they have been performed, to 


6 


क 


70 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | Chap. 3. 


appear. lauter on, as their fruits. This is technically 
known as apurva. : 
Aarma or sacrificial deeds prescribed in the Vedas. } 


e ~ * IE 
कंस SEDE दाळ Fea वम i 
तस्वथात्सवगत ब्रह्म Tuer यज्ञ WAT SAH e 

Hie qoc 

कम Karma mA risen from the Veda ब्रह्म 
Veda अक्षरसमुद्धवं risen from the Imperishable fate 
know gara therefore zd all-pervading SAT 
Veda fat ever qt in Vajna gfa(8s centred 

Know Karma to have risen from the Veda, 
and the Veda from the Imperishable. There- 
fore the all-pervading Veda,is ever centred 
in Yajna. 

.--pevafüne Veda: because itillumines all 
subjects and is the store of all knowledge, beine the 
out-breathing of the Omniscient. Itis said to be 

er cenirelón Yajna because it deals chiefly with 
Yajna. as fhe means of achievine the end, eithe 


Ot prosperity or final liberation. according as it 
is performed with or without desire. ] 


एवं प्रवर्तितं चक्र नानुवर्तयतीह यः ॥ 
अधायुरिन्द्रियारामों मोघं पार्थ स जीवति ॥१६॥ 
HL 16 न 

यः Who इह here md thus yalia set revolving 
Wm wheel not ग्रवुवतर्याते follows पार्थ Partha 
अघायुः living in sin इन्द्रियाएमः satisfied in the senses 
सः he Arq in vain जीवति lives, 

He, who here follows not the wheel thus 
set revo:ving, living in sin, and satisfied in 
the senses, O son of Pritha,—he, lives in vain. 


I4-19] THE WAY OF ACTION n 


p 


The wee! of action stirted br Prajapali on 
the basis of Veda and sacrifice. 7 


AVARA EIRA ZAR WIS. i 
€ q p : in m क. © 
आत्मन्येव च स्न्दुएस्तस्य काय न विद्यते ॥१७] 
Li p 

a But यः मानवः that man greaf: devoted to ihe 
Self एव alone च and आत्मतप्तः satisisd with the 
Self च and graf in the Self एव alone सन्ठुटः 
content स्यात may be weg his ergy work to be done 
(ise. duty ) 8 not faq exists 

But the man who is devoted to the Self, 


and is satisfied with the Self, and content in 
the Self alone, he has no obligatory duty. 


WS तस्य HAY माकऊतेनेह mara ॥ 


न चास्य सवभूतेषु काश्चदर्थव्यपाश्रयः ॥१८॥ 
IIL. त: 

तस्य Of that man gg in this world कृत्तेन by action 
done अथे: object न not एव sure अत्ति. is) Waa 
by action nol done कश्चन any (loss) ल not ( prem, 5) 
aand wey of this man सवभूतेषु among all beings 
wi any अथष्यपाश्रय: depending for any object 
q not 

He has no object in this world (to gain) by 
doing (an action) nor (does he incur any 
loss) by non-performance of action,——nor has 


he (need of) depending on any being for 
any object. 


तस्मादसक्तः सततं कार्य कमे समाचर ॥ 
असक्तो ह्याचरन्कमे परमाप्रोति पुरुषः NEM 


= f 
Uv» 


SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | [ Chap. 3: 


114." 3G 

तस्मात्‌ Therefore असक्तः without attachment wad 
siwavs कार्य which should be done, i. e, obligatory 
कर्म action समाचर perform FF because gag. with- 
out attachment qui action [wv performing: 
gag: man परम the highest आते attains, 

Therefore, do thou always perform actions 
which are obligatory, without attachment ;— 
by performing action without attachment, one 
attains to the highest, 


er € # FS aS m~ z 
RAUT DE सासादयास्यता जनकादयः ॥ 

bad - ha ~ æ e foc 
लाकसभहमवाप सपण्यन्कतुमहास ॥२०॥ 
Ile 26: 

हि Verily जनकादयः Janaka and others कर्मणाः 
by action एव alone संसिद्धि perfection आस्थिताः 
attained आपि also लोकसंग्रह guidance of men एव 
oniy संपश्यत्‌ having in view क्तुम्‌ io perform (action) 
Weta thou shouldst, 

Verily by action alone, Janaka and others 
attained perfection ;—also, simply with the 
view for the guidance of men, thou shouldst 
perform action. 

1 Guidance Cf men: the Sanskrit word means, 
gathering of men,—that is, into the right path. ] 

FN — A 
यद्यदाचरात श्रेष्ठस्तन्तदेवतरो जनः ॥ 
* ha -, e 
स यत्प्रमाणं mend लोकस्तदनुवतेते ॥२१॥ 
IL. ठा. 

घे: The superior यत यूद whatsoever आचरातिः 
does इतरः inferior जन: man qd ag that एव 
ony (does; सः that (superior) man ag what 


19-24 | THE WAY OF ACTION 73 


अमाणं demonstration कुरुते does qa that ata: the 
world ( people ) अ्रबुवतते follows 

Whatsoever the superior person does, that 
is followed by others What he demon- 
strates by action, that, people follow. 


न मे पार्थास्ति कर्तव्यं fag लोकेषु किचन di 
नानवाप्तमवाप्तव्यं वते एव च HAT ॥२२॥॥ 
III. 22. 

पार्थं 0 Partha! मे my कर्तऽयं duty न no अस्ति is 
fay inthe three army worlds ग्रनवाप्त unattained 
IREA to be gained किचन anything न्‌ not च vet 
HAW in action एव verily qq am 

I have, O son of Prithá, no duty, nothing 
that I have not gained, and nothing that I 
have to gain, in the three worlds; yet, I 
continue in action. 


यदि ह्यहं न वर्तेयं जातु कर्मण्यतन्द्रितः ॥ 
मम वत्माजुवतेन्ते मनुष्याः पार्थ सवशः ॥२३॥ 
HIE. 25. 
वार्थं O Partha! यदि if अहं I जातु ever अतन्द्रितः with- 
out relaxation RMR in action q not वर्तेय should be 


( तदा then ) हि surely मनुष्याः men qq my वत्मं path 
WAN: 11 every way ग्रनुवतेन्ते ( would ) follow 

If ever, I did not continue in work, without 
relaxation, men, O son of Prithá, would in 
every way, follow in my wake. 


उत्सीदेयुरिमे लोका न Har कमे चेदहम N 
सकरस्य च कतो स्यामुपहन्यामिमाः प्रजा: ॥२४॥ 


ii SRIMAD-BIIAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 3. 


AL. 24 

- T * C = Ce 

चत lis 1 क्म्‌ action not कुया would do 
EF these WIRE worlds उत गीदेयु: would perish =f and 
संकरस्य ot the admixture (of races) gaf author 
eura would) be इमाः these ar: beings उपच्याऱ 
"OIL TB. 

(m 
कर 1 
If 1 did not dowork, these worlds would 


- 


perish. 1 should be the cause of the ad- 
mixture of races, and [| should ruin these 
beings. 


e 


सक्ताः कमण्याविद्वांसो यथा कुवन्ति सारत B 
कुयङदास्तयासक्तअ्चकीएलःकसेध्रहम्‌ ey 
lli ठर 


भारत O 11000: कर्मणि to action सक्ताः attached 


"HEC luc unwise यथा as gE act gg i- 
४.०० लाकराशदह aCe ci the world fera 


gestruus lor विद्वान ihe wise तथा so काथाद chou 
act. - 

As do the unwise attached to work act, 
so should the wise act, O descendant of 
Bharata, ‘though ) without attachment, desir- 
ous fur the guidance of the world 


TUS WA जनयेदज्ञानां RAW SAT N 


याजयत्सवंकमाणा PIED. Cur ॥ ० ६ || 
Hl. zh. 


P © 37 
कमसाइंना OF the persons attaches ta actions 


"n 


ent of the 
मेल W net जनयत konl! creute Ferra 
efr Wise युक्त: ied 


अज्ञाना (be leuorant बुद्धिभद uns 


TARANG 91. actions समाचरन्‌ 
Y 


24-28 ] THE WAY OF ACTION 15 


One should not unsettle the understanding 
of the ignorant, attached to action; the wise, 
( himself ) steadily acting, should engage ( the 
ignorant) in all work. 


- A ~ A e e e 
GHA: TRATTA राणा: SUIDA सवशः di 
अर्हकारविसूढात्मो कतोहमिति मन्यते ॥२७॥ 
DN. क; 

qma: Of the Prakriti a: by the Gunas सवशः 
everywhere चर्माणि works क्रियमाणानि are performed 
ग्रहंकारविसूहाच्मा one whose understanding is deluded 
by egoism spi I कर्ता doer A this मन्यते 
thinks. 

The Gunas of Prakriti, perform all action. 
With the understanding deluded by egoism, 
one regards oneself, as ^ I am the doer.” 


qag महाबाहो गुणकमेविभागयो: ॥ 
गणा गुशोज akea इति मत्वा न सजते xl 
TIL ds. 

तु But महावाहो mighty-armed! शुशकमेब्रिभागयो: 
of the divisions ot Guna and Karma तस्ववित्‌ knower 
ot truth gar: Gunas (in the shape of the senses ) 
sùg amidst the Gunas ( in the shape of the objects) 
वतेन्ते remain gf this मत्वा knowing sp not ame 
becomes attached. 

But, one, with true insight into the domains 
of Guna and Karma, knowing that it is 
the senses which run after the objects, does 
not become attached. 


| Wath true insight etc, Knowing the truth that 
the Self is distinct from all Gunas, and actions. ] 


76 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap. 3. 


प्रकतेगुणसंमूढाः सञ्जन्ते गुशकमखु ॥ 
तानकृत्क्षविदो मन्दान्कृत्क्ाविज्ञ विचालयेत्‌ ॥२६॥ 
II. 29. 

gq: Of the Prakriti शुशसमूढा: persons deluded 
by Gunas TURAT in the functions of the Gunas 
सज्जन्ते become attached ara these अकृत्कविदः of 
imperfect knowledge मन्दात्‌ the dull-witted gie, 
man of perfect knowledge न not विचालयेत should 
unsettle (the understanding). 

Men of perfect knowledge should not un- 
settle (the understanding of} people of dull 
wit and imperfect knowledge, who deluded 
by the Gunas of Prakriti attach ( themselves j 
to the functions of the Gunas. 


[ Thase of imperfect knowledge: those who can 
only see as far as the immediate effect of actions. | 


मयि सवोशि कर्माणि संन्यस्याध्यात्मचेतसा ॥ 


meee ox सूत्वा x e. , 
निराशीनिममो भूत्वा युध्यस्व विगतज्वरः ॥३०॥ 
ills 30; æ 
pwe सर्वाणि <All कर्माणि actions मयि to me संन्यस्य 
renouncing अध्यात्मचेतता with mind centred on the 
Self निराशी: devoid of hope fep: devoid of 
egoism west being विगतज्वरः free from ( mental} 
fever geaeq ight. 
Renouncing all actions to Me, with mind 
centred on the Self, getting rid of hope and 


> 


selfishness, &ght,—ífree from ( mental ) fever. 
ये मे मतमिदं नित्यमड्ुतिएन्ति मानवाः ॥ 
श्रद्धावन्तोऽनसूयन्तो सुच्यन्ते तेऽपि mur ॥३१॥ 


29-33 | THE WAY OF ACTION iwi 


| HL- कॉ. 

श्रद्धावन्तः Full of Shraddha अनसूयन्त: not cavilling 
those who मानवाः men मे my इदं this qq. teaching 
नित्यं constantly अनुतिशन्ति practise ते they अपि even 
कर्मभिः from action सुच्यन्ते are freed. 

Those men who constantly practise this 
teaching of mine, full of Shraddha and with- 
out cavilling, they too, are freed from work. 

| Shraddhd: is a mental attitude constituted 
primarily of sincerity of purpose, humility, reverence 
and faith. You have Shraddha for your Guru— 
it is sincere reverence. You have Shraddhà for the 
Gita—it is admiration for those of its teachings 
you understand and faith in those that you do not. 
You give alms to a beggar with Shraddhá—it is a 
sense of humility combined with the hope that 
what you give will be acceptable and serviceable. | 


ये त्वेतदभ्यसूयन्तो नाञ्च॒तिष्ठन्ति मे AAA N 
सरवेज्ञानविसूडांस्तान्विद्धि नएानचेतसः ॥३२॥ 
LL. 35. 

g But ये those who एतत this my wd teaching 
अभ्यसूयन्तः decrying न not अनुतिष्ठन्ति practise सर्वेज्ञान- 
विभूढान्‌ deluded in all knowledge अचेतसः devoid 
of discrimination arą them qera ruined fara know. 

But those who decrying this teaching of 
mine do not practise (it), deluded in all 
knowledge, and devoid of discrimination, know 
them to be ruined. 


Beg चेष्टते स्वस्या: प्रकतेक्षानवानपि ॥ 
प्रकृति यान्ति भूतानि fang: कि करिष्याति ॥३३॥ 
IED. 25. 
ज्ञानवान्‌ A wise man आपि even स्वस्याः of his own 


78 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 3. 


प्रकृति: nature ggs in accordance with We acts 
भूतानि beings qg nature यान्ति follow विहः 
restraint fay what करिष्यति will do. 

Even a wise man acts in accordance with 


his own nature: beings follow nature: what 
can restraint do? 


e 
[The reason why some people do not follow the 
teaching of the Lord is explained here: Their 
(lower) nature proves too strong for them. | 


£z - f y = A ~ अपे 
इान्ट्रयस्यान्द्रस्याथ TNA व्यवास्थतां ॥ 

= & - A AO MAOA 2 
तयाने वशमागच्छेत्ता ह्यस्य पारपान्यना ॥३४॥ 

H. 4 

इन्द्रियस्य Of the senses इन्द्रियस्य अर्थ in the objects 
of the senses CIENT attachment and aversion 
व्यवात्यिदों ordained by nature तयोः of those two q9 
sway न्‌ not आगच्छेत should come under तो those 
two हि verily अस्य his परिपन्थिनी foes. 

Attachment and aversion of the senses for 
their respective objects are natural: let none 
come under their sway: they are his foes. 


| His: of the seeker aiter truth. 


Though, as has been said in the foregoing sloka, 
some are so completely under the sway of their 
naiural propensities, that restraint is of no avail to 
them, yet the seeker after truth should never think 
of following their example. but should always 
exert himself to overrule all attachmént and 
aversion of the senses for their objects. | 


श्रयान्स्वघर्मो विशुणशः were ॥ 
स्वधेमे निधने अथः परघर्मा भयावहः ॥३५॥ 


33-36 | THE WAY OF ACTION 79 


स्वनुष्ठितात्‌ From the well-performed परधमात 
Dharma of another विगुणाः imperfect eqq: one 
own Dharma अपणास better egy in one's own 
Dharma निधनं death Sra: better yeg: Dharma of 
another भयावह; fraught with fear. 

. 79 ` 

Better is one’s own Dharma, (though) 
imperfect, than the Dharma of another well- 
performed. Better is death in one's own 
Dharma: the Dharma of another 1s fraught 
with fear, 

| The implication is that Arjuna’s thought of 
desisting from fight and going in for the calm. and 
peacetul life of the Brdhmana is prompted by man's 
natural desire to shun what is disagreeable and 
embrace what is agreeable to the sense He 
should on no account vield to this weakness. | 


Mya उबाच di 
अथ केन प्रयुक्तोऽयं पापं चरति ew: ॥ 
अनिच्छक्षपि वाष्शय वलादि नियोजितः ॥३६॥ 
Jit. «95. 
HAT उवाच Arjuna said: 
eremi Várshneva!sper now आनिच्न not wishing 
अधि ८५७९० अच thisargs: Purusha केन by what IFR 


impelled Fara bv force इव as it were नियाजित 
constrained gry sin चरति commits. 


Arjuna said: 
But by what impeiled does man commit 
sin, thouuh against his wishes, O Várshneya 


constrained as it were, by force: 
[ Várshueya : a descendant of the race of Vrishni. | 


37-40 | TIE WAY OF ACTION ` 8i 


fire enveloped by smoke :—the rise of a slight wind 
of discrimination dispels the smoke of desire in a 
Satvic heart, The second, the Réjasic,---the dust 
on a mirror, requires some time and preparation, 
While the third,—the 'l'àmasic, takes a much 
longer time, like the release of the embryo [rom 
the womb. ] 


आवृतं क्ञानमेपेन ज्ञानिनो नित्यावेरिशा N 
SX R 


- " STADT 
HARI कॉन्तय दुष्प्रणशानलन च ॥३६॥ 
ILI. ‘SO 

कोन्तेय O Kounteya! झाविन: of the wise Radiu 
by the constant foe कामरूपेण whose form is desire 
च and दुष्प्रेण' unappeasable एतेन spar by this fire 
ज्ञानं knowledge wá covered, 

Knowledge is covered by this, the constant 
foe of the wise, O son of Kunti, the un- 
appeasable fire of desire, 

[ Desire is undoubtedly the foe. of all mankind, 
Why it is said to be the constant foe of the wise, is 
that they feel it to be so even when under its SWAY, 
Fools are awakened for a moment only, when they 
suffer from its painful reactions, ] 


इन्द्रियाशि मनो बुद्धिरस्याधिष्ठानसुच्यते ॥ 
एतेविंमोहयत्येष ज्ञानमाइत्य देहिनम्‌ dell 
LLL. uo: 

इन्द्रियाणि Senses मॅन: mind gfe: intellect seq its 
अधिष्ठान abode उच्च्यते are said एष: this wey: by these 
ard knowledge आवृत covering देहिनं the embodied 
विमोहयांते deludes, 

The senses, the mind and the intellect are 
said to be its abode: through these, it deludes 
the embodied by veiling his wisdom, 


os SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap. 3. 

i Pike a wise general, Krishna points out the 
ioriress of the enemy. by conquering which the 
enomy is easily defeated. 


Juroush PAese ; bv vitiating the senses, mind and 
the inteilect. | 


तस्सात्वमिन्द्रियारयादो नियस्य मरतर्षभ ॥ 
पाप्माने प्रजहि छनं ज्ञानविज्ञाननाशनम ॥2२॥ 
[EE opis 

wey O Bull of the Bharata race! तस्मात there- 
fore ep vou जादे at the outset इन्द्रियाणि senses 
fau controlling जञानविज्ञावनाशनं the destroyer oi 
knowledge and realisation prd the sinful fz 
surely एने this प्रजहि kill. 

Therefore, O Bull of the Bharata race, 
controlling the senses at the outset, kih it— 
the sinful, the destrover of knowledge and 
realisation. 


e~ ~ ex gv * 

इन्द्रयाश पराणयाहारान्द्रयेक्ष्य: परं मन:॥ 
oe वद्धः : 
पनसस्तु परा दाद्या बुद्ध: परतस्तु स्रः ॥४२॥ 
II 42. 

इन्द्रयाणि Senses परा superior "ITE: (they ) say 
इन्द्रियेग्यू: to the senses qq: mind परं superior मनसः 
o mind q but बुद्धिः intellect परा Superior थ: who 
I bui to the intellect Weg: superior सः He 
is the Atman |. 

The senses are said to be superior (ta the 
xdv); the mind is superior to the senses: 
he intellect is superior to the mind ; and that 


` He (the Atman) who is superior to the 
1tellect. 


135 क 1 1111, WAL Ur AULLUIN eo 


b 


UT ERST सस्तभ्यात्सानमात्मना ॥ 


र्‌ 
जाइ US महावाहा कामरूप दुरासदम्‌ Hezi 
IT 13. 

wearer O mighty-armed! gå thus ge: of the 
intellect qt superior बुद्धाः knowing grear by the 
Self ग्रात्मानं 5०1६ geye restraining कामरूप whose 
form is desire दुशस॒द unseizable qa enemy fz 
destroy. 


~ 
EF 


“So 


MI 


lhus, knowing Him who is the superior 
of the intellect, and restraining the self by the 
Self destroy, O mighty-armed, that enemy, 
the unseizable foe, of desire. 

a SLA m O^ 
इति कसयोगो नास तृतीयोऽव्यायः ॥ 

The end of the third chapter, designated 

THE WAY OF ACTION. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ चतुर्थोऽध्यायः ॥ 
FOURTH CHAPTER 


श्रीभगवाङुवाच ॥ 
इमं विवस्वते योगं प्रोक्तवानहमव्ययस्‌ ॥ 


विवस्वान्मनवे प्राह मन्ुरिकष्वाकवेऽब्रवीत्‌ ॥१॥ 
De TE 

stara उवाच The Blessed Lord said : 

अह 1 विवस्वते to Vivasvin इमं this अव्यय imperish- 
able arr Yoga प्रोक्तवाच्‌ told विवस्वाच Vivasvan मनवे 
to Manu प्राइं told मनु Manu इक्ष्वाकवे to Ikshvaku 
yada told. 

The Blessed Lord said : 

I told this imperishable Yoga to Vivasvat ; 
Vivasvat told it to Manu; (and ) Manu told it 
to Ikshvàku: 


| Vivasvat:; the Sun, Manu: the law-giver. 
Ikshvüku, was the famous ancestor of the Solar 
Cvnasty of Kshattriyas, 


This Yogais said to be imperishable, because the 
end attainable through it is imperishable. ] 


एवं परंपराप्राप्तमिम राजषेयो विदुः ॥ 
स कालेनेह महता योगो AT: परंतप ॥२॥ 


1-4. | SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 85 


EUs 2. 


wy Thus पश्पराप्ावं handed down in regular 
succession g it राजयः the roval sages Ag: knew 
gigg burner of foes gg in this world सः that योग: 
Yoga agar by long gas lapse of time qz: declined. 

Thus banded down in regular succession, 
the royal sages knew it. This Yoga, by long 
lapse of time, declined in this world, O, 
burner of foes. 

स एवार्य सया तेऽद्य योगः प्रोकतः पुरातनः 
सक्तोऽसि भे सखा चेति रहस्यं EDGE ॥३॥ 
i 28. 

मे My wee: devotee सखा friend च and aie 
(thou) art sf for this reason @: एव even that 
परातन: ancient योग: Yoga gå this ga this day 
संखा by me @ to thee शोन्कः has been told fẹ for 
usu this उसनं profound रहस्यं secret. 

I have this day told thee that same ancient 
Yoga, (for) thou art my devotee, and my 
friend, and this secret is profound indeed. 

[ Secret: Not as the privilege ofan individual or 


a sect, but because of its profundity. It is a 
secret to the unworthy only. | 


GAT उवाच N 
अपरं भवतो जन्म परं जन्म विवस्वतः ॥ 
कथमेर्ताङ्गजानीयां त्वसादौ प्रोक्तवानिति ॥४॥ 
T अः 
अजुन Arjuna उवाच said : 
wag: Thy जन्म birth परं later विवस्वतः of Vivasvat 


जन्म birth qt prior waa this कथं how Amia 
7 


S6 THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 





4. 


should I know त्वे thou आदी in the beginning 
प्रोक्तवाच toid इति this. 
rjuna said: 
Later was Thy birth, and that of Vivasvat 
prior : how then should I understand that Thou 


tolcest this in the becinnino ? 
"n 


ऋसयचाडुवाच d 


बहूनि मे ग्यवीवानि जन्मानि तव चाजुन d 


9 


तान्यहं वद Baia न त्वं वेत्य परंतप dul 
IV. 5. 
श्रीभगवाव ine Blessed Lord उवाच said: 
परंदप © scorcher of foes अजुन Arjuna W my तव 
thy च and वहनि many अल्माचि births व्यत्तीतानि 
have passed away art I and them सर्वाणि all वेद 
know eq thou न not Bee knowest 


The Diessed Lord said: 


Many are the births that have been passed, 
by Meand thee, O Arjuna. I know them all, 
wast thou xnowest not, O scorcher of foes. 


AMT सखव्ययात्मा भूतानामीश्वरोऽपि सनू ॥ 
पङ्ति स्थामधिष्ठाय सम्भवाम्यात्ममायया NEN 
IN. 6. 
अज्ञः Unbom uw being आपि even अव्ययात्मा of 
CUINSC USS Talure VR of being gv Lord nd 
४ WW beng eq of one's own प्रक्रत” Prakriti 
IPA 5011231177 आत्ममायया by my own Maya 


Laus] 


i दाम ome Ineo Deine 


Ynouch lamu n, of changeless nature 
nd Lord of beings, yet subjugating My 


$ F ACTION IN X^ 87 
48] OF ACTION IN के vost spog 87 


Prakriti, T come into’ |. 
| [ Seejrgaling MY p 
into heing as oth 
the thrawldom 
by the fett 
ord of M 

H OTC E Ayu. 


Br y . 
TUO (MY own Jaya: My embodiment is only 
SPP? cent and does not touch My true nature. | 


"abrifi: He does not come 
Jr do, bound by Karma, under 
of Prakriti (Nature). He is not tied 
FS of the Gunas—because He is the 


" M e ९ em. 
et यदा हि THT ग्लानिभेर्वात भारत I 
ग्रष्युत्यानमधमस्य तदात्मानं खजाम्यददन ॥७॥ 
D EE, 

भारत O Bharata! wer ser whenever हि surely 
चर्मस्य of Dharma मभल: decline arre of Adharma 
aeger rise भर्वात is तदा then sez I रात्मानं myself 
«sme body forth. 

Whenever, O descendant of Bharata, there 


is decline of Dharma, and rise of Adharma, 
then I body Myself forth. 


परिद्राश्याय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम्‌ di 
धर्मसेस्थायनाथोय सेभवासि युगे युगे ॥८॥ 
IV. 8. 
argat Of the good qarara for the protection 
aand gsgaf of the wicked विनाशाय for the des- 


truction धर्मसंत्यावनार्थाय for the establishment of 
Dharma gër खुण in every age संभवम्‌ come into being. 


i 


For tħe protection of the gaod, for the 
destruction ofthe wicked, and for the establish- 
ment of Dharma, I come into being in every 
age. 

o 


| Desirzetion of the wicked: in order to des troy 
their wickedness, and give them life eternal. ] 


S SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


दिव्यभेवे यो ate deua: ॥ 
हं पुनर्जन्म नेति मामेति aga neil 


t E E न | 
अञ्च O Arjuna य: who भे. पर्व thus faex divine 
— 
जम thay awi ga action तत्वतः in true hebt 
E 


afa krows रा: he दं६ body ume 
जन्न bull न not why sets मास me एव atalas. 

He, who thus knows, in true light, My 
diving birth and action, leaving the bodv. is 


nof burn again: he attains to Me, O Arjuna 


~ al ~ 
Sr ७ + 


fie से कार ads CCS: tie who Knows the grea 
h apparently born is 
b, though apparently 
a tive do Lise Of righteousness. is ever beyond 
&a üedun.—2ecomes Hlumined with Seif-knowl- 
ede. Sach a man is never burn again. ] 


x r . I 

Rd Lud. lic is) T. tO 
ever bevel brih amd « 
a 


bay 7 


Y 
a 
l 


? 
zu 


aT यन्मया grar aran: ॥ 


3 
I 
==} 

24 
= 

K 
xi l 


वहवा सा पूना CUERPO Nell 
i Y. 1 
दतराग नयक्रीघा: Freed from attachment, fear and 


५०.८५ मत्स्याः aosorbel ia me af me — उप्राअता: 
fading refuge in ज्ञाननवदा by the dire of knowledge 
GAT: ; write d Jis many मङ्गा my being inar: 
have attained, 


b 


Freed from attachment, fear, and ance! 
bsorbed in Me, taking refuge in Me purifieid 
by the īre of Knowledge, many have attained 


"TS PES . 1 
QcauN sav) Baie’ > The import is that the 
Pola oc ueeration here taught by Sri Krishna is not 


" SRO RU iS gt üependent upon His 
क्क ee 


uuestaiion, but has been handed down 
Ioni GiLg Mulnueinoriai * 


9-12 | FOURTII CIIAPTER 89 


T, è 
ये यथा मा प्रपवन्ते aA ARITITE ll 
& wm + 
सस वत्मासुबतन्त सदुष्या: पाथ सवरा uel 
IN. GE 

ये Who यथा in whatever way माँ me qqa 

worship ara them, आहे I «qur in the same way 

T FX . .: © SYS 
शव vertiy भजामि bestow (their desires) पाये O Partha 
मनुष्या: men qfy: in all ways मम my qaf path 
अनुवर्तन्ते follow. 

In whatever way men worship Me, in the 
same way do I fulfil their desires: ( it is) My 
path, O sou of Prithá, (that) men tread, in all 
ways. 

[ In this sloka Sri Krishna anticipates the objec- 
tion that God is partial to some and unkind to 
others, since He blesses some with self-knowledge 
and leaves the rest in darkness and misery. ‘This 
difference is not due to any difference in His 
altitude towards them, but is of their own choice. 

All paths are His: In the whole region of 
thought aud action, wherever there is fullilment of 
object, no matter what, the same is due to the Lord 


is the Self within, He brings about all wishes 
when the necessary conditions are fulfilled. ] 


काङ्गन्तः कमंशां fate यजन्त इह देवता: ॥ 
TQ ह ATIT लाक TATRA A कमजा ॥१२॥ 
IV. 12 

equ Of actions सिद्धि success praa: longing for 
sz in this world देवता: gods यजन्ते worship हि be- 
cause मानुषे in the human @fa world fay quickly 
aaa born of action सिद्धि: success ward is attained. 

Longing for success in action, in this world, 
(men) worship the gods, Because success, 


90 THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION— [ Chap. 4. 


resulting from action, is quickly attained in 
the human world. 

[ Because success... human world: Worldly 
success is much easier of attainment than seli- 


knowledge. Hence itis that the ignorant do not go 
in for the latter. | 


चालुवेश्य मया खष्टं शुणकर्सखिभागशः di 


e A~ e eA ९ 
तस्य ward मा विद्धक ता रमब्ययम ॥१३॥ 
Te 2a, 
र. +- . E 
qer Dy me युणळमंविभागराः by the differentiation 
- c nM K] Ld 
of Guna and Karma wrgaua fourfold caste TE 
~ C. yp है z 
was 070०20 geg thereof कतार author sọ even AF 
- Rt. gm orm 
me geng changeless कतार non-doer fate know. 

The fourfold caste was created by Me, by 
the differentiation of Guna and Karma. 
Though f am the author thereof, know Me to 
be non-doer, and changeless. 

; This stoka is intended to explain the diversity 
of human temperaments and tendencies. All men 
are not of the same nature. because ot the preponver- 
ance of the different Gunas in them. 

The caste system was originally meant to make 
perfect the growth of humanity. by the specia 
culture of Certain features, through the process ob 
discriminate selection. 

Though f am dhe author खात. The Lord, though 
the author of the caste system is vet not the author. 
The same dread of being taken as a doer or an 


Lans] 


agent, Crops up again and again. The paradox is 
explained in Chap. IX. 5-10. Maya is the real 
author, but He is taken as such, because “it is His 
light which gives existence, not only te ait actions, 
but to Maya herself. | 


न सां कयोशि लिर्पान्त न मे कर्मफल स्एहा I 
इति माँ योऽभिजानाति कमाभन स वभ्यत ॥ १2 


12-16] OF ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE 91 


IV. 14. 

कराणि Actions af me q not निंपन्ति taint में my 
qara in the result of action स्पृहा desire न not 
डात thus यः who af me miasta knows a: he 
mara: by actions ap not geg is fertered. 

Actions do not taint Me, nor have I any 

5 A E 
thirst for the result of action. He who knows 
Me thus, is not fettered by action. 


[Acitons do not faint Me: Karma cannot intro- 
duce into Me anything foreign. I never depart 
from My true Self, which is All-fullness. ] 


Up ज्ञात्वा HA कम पूर्वराप FAT: Il 


कुरु कमव Wee VW. पूवतर BAK ll edi 
[ya UES, 

एवं Thus grar knowing Wi: by the ancient 
Xa: seekers after freedom अपि even कर्मे action 

. > = 
zd was done तस्मात therefore त्वे thou qq: by the 
ancients qimi in olden times ggg. done कम action 
एज verily कर perform 

Knowing this, the ancient seekers after 
freedom, also performed action, Do thou, there- 

3 ) 

fore, perform action, as did the ancients in 
olden times. 

_ क क्यात this: Taking this point of view, that 
is, the Self can have no desire for the fruits of 
action and cannot be soiled by action. ] 


कि कमे किमकर्मेति कवयोष्प्यञ सोहिवा: ॥ 
तत्ते कम प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्शात्वा मोल्यसेष्शुभाव १६ 


LV. TO: 
कि What कमे action कि what अकमे inaction इति 
thus अव in this कवयः sages ओप even मोहिताः be- 


92 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


wildered ( sya: therefore ) यत which ज्ञात्वा knowing 
gaara from evil मोक्ष्यसे will be freed qa that ते to 
thee कर्मे action प्रवक्ष्यामि ( I} shall tell. 

Even sages are bewildered, as to what is 
action and what is inaction. I shall therefore 
tell you what action is, by knowing which 
you will be freed from evil. 


[ Evil: the evil of existence, the wheel of birth 
and death. | 


eg w ~ क * w » ~. € 
कमरणाष्ह्याप वादव्य बांदव्य च वकमणः: d 
अकर्मणश्च बोद्धव्ये गहना कणों गतिः ULSI 

IV A 

हि Because कर्मणः of actions अपि even (ere the true 
nature} बोद्धच्यं has to be understood विकर्मणः of the 
forbidden action च and ( afr even ) वाद्धव्यं has to be 
understood अकमेणश: of inaction च and ( ग्रॉपि even } 
ape@eq has to be understood zgqur: of Karma तिः 
nature agaf impenetrable. 

For verily, (the true nature) even of action 
(enjoined by the Shastras) should be known, 
as also, ( that ) of forbidden action, and of in- 
action: the nature of Karma is impenetrable. 


कर्मणयकम यः QATRAN च कम यः ॥ 


स चुद्धिमान्मनुष्येयु स युक्तः kun ULSI 
IV. 18. 

यः Who कर्मणि in action spg4 inaction quae 

would see यः who gagi in inaction zr and कर्म 

action que would see सः he मनुब्ययु among men 


बुद्धिमान intelligent सः he युक्त: Yogi mW d 
doer of all action. 


16-20 ] FOURTH CHAPTER 93 


He who sees inaction in action, and action, 
in inaction, he is intelligent among men, 
he is a Yogi and a doer of all action. 

[An action is an action so long as the idea of 
actor-ness of the Self holds good. Directiy the 
idea of actor-ness disappears, no matter what or 
how much is done, action has lost its nature. It 
has become barrén: it can no longer bind. On 
the other hand, how much so ever inactive an 
ignorant person may remain, so long as there is the 
idea of actor-ness in him, be is constantly doing 
action. Action equals to belief in the actor-ness 
of oneself and inaction its reverse. 

He is the doer of all action : He has achieved the 
end of all action, which is freedom.) 


यस्य सर्जे समारंभा: कामसङ्ट्पवजित्ाः ॥ 
ज्ञानाशिदग्यकमाण तमाहुः पारडतं TAT: ॥१६॥ 
IV. 109. 

यस्य Whose सर्वे all समारभ: undertakings छाम- 
संकल्पवर्जिवाः devoid of plan and desire for results 
बुधाः the sages ज्ञानाधिदग्थकर्माएं whose actions are 
burnt by the fire of knowledge तं him षत wise 
are: call. 

Whose undertakings are all devoid of plan 
and desire for results, and whose actions are 
burnt by the fire of knowledge, him, the 
Sages call wise. 

[ Whose undertakings €c., Who is devoid of 
egoism.| 

e - € -— A 
व्यक्षत्वा' कमफसासङ्ग नत्यतता TATA: ॥ 
कर्मश्य भिप्रद्नसोषपि नेव किन्चित्कराति सः ॥२०॥ 
IV. 20. 

सः He कमफतासड clinging to the fruits of action 

त्यकत्वा forsaking नित्यतृप्तः ever satisfied निराप्रय: 


$94 THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION— [ Chap. 4. 


depending on nothing कर्मणि in action अरभिभवृत्तः 
engaged ऋषि even Rafera anything एव verily ल not 
करोति does. 

Forsaling the clinging to fruits of action, 


ever satisfied, depending on nothing, though 


engaged in action, he does not do anything. 
C S e toe 
नराशायाताचचात्फा तवक्तसवपारग्रह: ॥ 
शारीरं केवलं कमे STRATA (क्षटिविपम ॥२१॥ 
IV. £i. 

निराशी: Without hope यर्वाचिसात्मा one whose mind 
and body have been controlled grezc4uívua: one 
who has relincuished all possessions केवलं merely 
शारीर bodily कने action gga doing द्विल्दिषं evil न 
7701 गामो Lucus. 

Without hope, the body and mind controlled, 
aud all possessions relinquished, he does 
not suffer any evil consequences, by doing 
mere bodily action. 


_ Evil consequences: resulting from good and bad 
actions, tor both lead to bondage. | 


ट्‌ ene —— ia E . 
यचच्छालासखरच्तुश ESTAS dua ॥ 


हः ^ e " 
समः सिद्धार्वासद्धां च त्वाप न निवध्यते २२ 
VI. 22. 
यर्च्छालासश्चन्तुएः Content with what comes to him 
withuut effort Ferrara: unaffected by the pairs of 
opposites fgxzu tree from envy Regt in success 
siati in Tahure चब and समः even-minded paf 


£m 


acting ओद्‌ even न not निव्यत is bound. 
Content with what comes to him without 
effort, unaffected by the pairs of opposites, 


20-24] OF ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE 95 


free from envy, even-minded in success and 
failure, though acting, he is not bound. 


गतसड़स्य WHET ज्ञानावस्थित्ेसस्य: ॥ 
यज्ञायाचरतः कम ud प्रायश्यायत iz 
iX 8. 

रातराठ्रस्य Of one who is devoid of attachment 
Use the liberated झानाइस्यितच्चवसः whose mind is 
centred in knowledge agag fur Yajna आवरत: 
performing gx whole gj Karma प्रविज्लीयंत dis- 
solves away. 

Devoid of attachment, liberated, with mind 
centred in knowledge, performing work for 
Yajua alone, his whole Karma dissolves away. 


x). ® A d A 3 x eu 
FAUNA ब्रह्म हावबरह्माञ्ां SANT mU ॥ 
ZA bar E » g La ee 5 , 
HAT सेन गन्तव्ये SAATA AAT ॥२०॥ 
INS. vod 
आपल Process of offering ब्रह्म Brahman हति: 


e 


E 


oblation as clarified butter दहा Lrahwan FTE in 
the fre ot Brahman mgrar by Brahman #4 is ulered 
garagu by the man who is absorbed in 
action which is Brahman rq by him ब्रह्म Brahman 
एव verily गन्तब्य should be reached. 

The process is Brahman, the clarified butter 
is Brahman, in the fire of Brahinan offered by 
Brahman, by seeing Brahman in action, he 
reaches Brahman alone. 

How can the whole Karma of a person engaged 
in work melt away as stated here? Because’ alter 
knowledge, his whole life becomes one act of 


Yajna, in which the process of oblation, the offer- 
ing, the fire, the doer of the sacrifice, the work, and 


1 क 


96 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


the goal. are all Brahman. Since his Karma pro- 
duces no other result than the attainment of 
Brahman, his Karma is said to melt away. ] 


देवभेवापरे यज्ञं योगिनः पर्युपासते ॥ 
AMAA यज्ञं यज्ञेमेवो पुति ॥२५॥ 
I3: 25; 

अपरे Other योगिनः ४०४ द्‌ pertaining to Devas 
एव verily यज्ञं ८7/८९ पर्युपासते perform अपरे others 
ब्रह्माग्नौ in the fire of Brahman यत्तेन by self एव verily 
aa the self उपज्जुङ्गाति offer as sacrifice. 

Some Yogis perform sacrifices to Devas 
alone, while others offer the self as sacrifice 


by the self in the fire of Brahman alone. 


_ Others offer €t ; The sacrifice referred to here, 
is, divesting the Self of Its Upadhis (limiting 
adjuncts} so that It is found to be the Self. | 


श्रोत्रादीनीन्द्रियाणयन्ये संयसास्रिषु gers ॥ 
शब्दार्दोन्विषयानन्य इन्द्रियाप्निषु gg २६॥ 
IV. 26. 
अन्ये Others संयमाप्निषु in the fire of control 


श्रोत्रादीनि organ of hearing etc., इन्द्रियाणि senses 

Zia Oder as sacrifice Wey others शव्दादीन्‌ sound 
etc., विषयान्‌ Sense-objects इन्द्रियानिषु in the fire of 
the Senses जुद्दनि offer as sacrifice. 

Some again offer hearing and other senses 
as sacrifice in the fire of control, while others 
offer sound and other sense-objects as 
sacrifice in the fire of the senses. | 

- Others offer sound Æc.: Others direct their 
senses towards pure and unforbidden objects, and 


in ~ doing regard themselves as performing acts 
Of sacrifice. _ 


24-29 | FOURTII CHAPTER 97 


सवोशीनिद्रयकप्तो शि पाणकमाणि चापरे ॥ 
ग्रात्मसयमयोगाशी ऊहति STATA ॥२७॥ 


ive, कां 
आपरे Others झानदीजिले kindled by knowledge 
यातम in the fire of control in self सागा 


ail gferuarnivar actions of the senses प्राशकर्माशि 
funcuons of tue Mial energy sy and spgfe ofter as 
sacrifice. 

Some again offer all the actions of the 
senses and the functions of the vital energy, 
as sacrifice in the fire of control in self, kindled 
by knowledg 


Tyee 28 

war Again gg} others gezmup: those who offer 
wealth as saciince murem: those who offer austerity 
as sacrifice WWE: those who offer Yoga as 
sacrifice संदिताः persons of rigid vows यतयः 
persons of self- int स्वाध्प्रायणावयक्ता those who 
utter study and knowledge as sacrifice = and. 

Others again offer wealth, austerity, and 
Yoga, as sacrifice, while still others, of self- 
restraint and rigid vows, offer study of the 
scriptures and knowledge, as sacrifice. 

[ Offer Toga as sacrifive: Practise the eightfold 
Yoga as an act oi sacrifice. | 
अपाने Sid पाथा प्राशाीष्यान तथाऽपर ॥ 
प्राणापानगती रुद्धा राणायामपरायस्याः ॥ 


अपरे नियताहाराः प्राशान्जेशबु BRA ॥२६॥ 





98 THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION— [ Chap. 4. 


IV. 209. 

तथा Yet wat others ग्रषाने into the Apana 
प्राणं the Prana ग्रास into the Prana अपाशण the 
Ápana जुहति sacrifices प्राणापाणगती courses of 
the out-going and in-going breaths Rel stopping 
प्राणायामपरायशाः constantly practising the regulation 
of the vital energy, अपरे others नियधशा दारा: persons of 
regulated food rara functions of the Pramas प्राशेषु 
in the Pranas srgfq sacrifices. 

Yet some offer as sacrifice, the out-going 
into the in-coming breath, and the in-coming 
into the out-going, stopping the courses of the 
in-coming and out-going breaths, constantly 
practising the regulation of the vital energy ; 
while others yet of regulated food, offer in the 
Pranas the functions thereof. 

[Ofer in de Pranas the functions thereof: 
Whatever Prana has been controlled, into it they 
sacrifice all other Pranas; these latter become, as 
it were, merged in the former. Or, in another 
wav: They control the different Pranas and unify 
them by the foregoing method; the senses are thus 
attenuated and are merged into the unified Prana,. 
as an act of sacrifice. 

All the various acts described in verses 25 to 29; 
as offerings of sacrifice, are only conceived as such,, 
the study of the scriptures, is regarded as an act, of 
sacrifice, and so on. | 

च येते mn ON न्न e. — : i 
qasqa यक्षांवदा यज्ञचायतक्षल्सषा: ell: 

auc > 
arenas यान्ति ब्रह सनातनम्‌ ॥ * 


नायं लोकोऽर्त्ययज्ञस्य कुठोघ्ण्यः्कुरुसक्तम ell 
IVe- 20. क. 

aq All ग्रांपे even wa these यज्ञाविदः knowers of 

Yajna यज्ञक्षयितकल्मषाः persons having their sins 


29-32] OF ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE 99 


consumed by Yajna gaama O best of the Kurus 
यतशिष्ठाप्रतसुन: persons eating of the nectar—the 
remnant of Yajna सनातन eternal agy Brahman 
यान्ति go WH this arm: world gizrges of the non- 
performer of Yajna न not आस्ति 3 न्यः another ङुतः 
how, 

All of these ave knowers of Yajna, having 
their sins consumed by Yajna, and eating of 
the nectar—the remnant of Yajna, they go to 
the Eternal Brahman. (Even } this world is 
not for the non-performer of Yajna, how then 
another, O best of the Kurus ? 

[ They go fo the Liernal Brahman: in course of 
time, after attaining knowledge througa purification 
of heart. 

Even this world is not for the nou-performer af 
Fajna: this means,—he that does not perform one 
of the Yajnas above mentioned, is not fit even for 
this wretched human world,—low then could he 
hope to gain a better world than this? | 

* NEM Ga "T zT £- up ~ 
एव बहांचधा यज्ञा DID Aaa सुल n 


f € 


RUA तान्सवोनेवं ज्ञात्वा विमोष््यसे ॥३२॥ 
IX. आट; 

ब्रह्मणः Of the Veda सुखे (lit. mouth ), in the 

store-house oq thus SEG various यज्ञा; Yajnas 

faar: are strewn ere them «ars. all कर्मजान्‌ born 

of action fafg know एवं thus ज्ञात्वा knowing 
विमोक्ष्यसे ( thou) shalt be free. 


A 


Various Yajnas like the above, are strewn 
in the store-house of the Veda. Know them 
all to be born of action, and thus knowing, 
thou shalt be free. 


100 ., SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


d 


| Sfrezem inthe store-house of the Veda: inculcated 
by or known through the Veda. ] 


शेयान्द्व्यसयायक्षाज्हानयज्ञ: परतप ॥ 

T em. > © - m~ ~ 

खद Haase पाथ ज्ञान पारससाप्यते ॥३३॥ 
IY. 33, 

परंतप! © scorcher of foes, हृष्यनयाव with 
( material ) objects agra to sacrifice ज्ञानथञः knowl- 
edge-sacrilice श्ेयान superior qp? O Partha सर्वे गा 
ग्रखिजे in its entirety कर्म action जाने in knowledge 
qam is culminated. 

Knowledge-sacrifice, O scorcher of foes, is 
superior to sacrifice (performed) with (material) 
objects. All action in its entirety, O Partha, 
attains its consummation in knowledge. 


तद्विद्धि प्रशियातेन पारिप्रक्षेन सेवया ॥ 
उपदेक्ष्यन्ति ते ज्ञाने झानिनस्तस्वदर्शिन: ॥३३॥ 
IV. 31. | 

प्रशिषपालेन Bv prostrating thyself परिप्रश्ेव by ques- 
tion सेवया by service qa that ( ज्ञा knowledge) fate 
know ज्ञानिन: the wise तरूदार्शिनः those who have 
reaiised the Truth ते thee सान knowledge उपदेक्षान्त 
will instruct. 
Know that, by prostrating thyself, by ques- 
tions, and by service; the wise, those who 
havevealised the Truth, will instruct thee in 
that knowledge. 


La 


i Prostration before the Guru, questions, and 
personal services to him, constitute discipleship. 

Those who have realised the Truth : mere theoret- 
ical knowledge, however perfect, does not quaiily 
a person to be a Guru: the Truth, or Brahman, 


N 


— , 





STU 
Se o Ew] + दाण oe 


$98" 6 woe aman POSE GOODS ४७२ G46 4 Sy a Pid C a 


we xd eo a 








3 2 -3 7 ] ven 2 aap Foyqr pg 20990202 छश किक 


myst be realised, before one can claim that musi 
elevated. position, | 


यज्ज्ञास्था न पुनमोहमेय॑ यास्यस्रि पारडव १ 


येन झूतान्यशेपाणि दस्यस्यात्मन्यया AT ॥३५॥ 

> IY. : 

पाणडव Q DPáíndava mm which greg knowing पुनः 

again wi like this मोहे delusion न not apes wj 

8० येव by which अशयाशि all भूतानि beings mafa 

in (thy ) self gray and afin me (i. e. highest Scii» 
e» thou Y shalt see 


^33 
try 


Knowing which, thou shalt not, O Pándav 
again get deluded like this, and by which 
thou skalt see the whole of creation in (thy : 
Self aud tn Me. 


| Which: the knowledge referred to im ine 
preceding sloka to be learnt from the Guru. | 


आपि चेदसि पापिभ्यः WHY: ISEN: d 
सव SISNEdW gi स्वन्तारिष्यास्त ॥३६॥ 
JV. 36. 
uae: Among al wre even qp: the sinful 
Spa even if परपकूतम: must sinful आखि (thou? be we 


all चाजने sin ज्ञानप्तवेन by ratio knowiecre 
सच्तरिष्यास shall go across. 


^ Even if thou beest the most sinful among oli 
the sinful, vet bv the raft of knowledge alone 
thou shalt go across all sin. 
SUI खमिद्योफग्रभेस्मस्तास्कुर्ते$्जन ॥ 
RAM: सवकसाया सस्मसात्कुरुत तथा ४8३०४ 
o 


m, Ta 
w et X 


A C 
102 THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION— [ hap. 4. 


PN शी. 

WHA O Arjuna यथा as समिद्ध: blazing apf: fire 
mye woods warara reduced to ashes कुरुतं makes 
तथा SO TATA: fire of knowledge सर्दकमा/णि all 
Karma भस्मसात reduced to ashes करुत makes. 

As blazing fire reduces wood into ashes, so, 
O Arjuna, does the fire of knowledge reduce 
ail Karma to ashes. 

Excepting of course the frdraddha, or Karma 


which causing the present body, has begun to 
bear fruits. : 


नहि ज्ञानेन Get पवित्रमिह विद्यते ॥ 
> >, क ~ अ e. ~ ~ 
तत्स्य IRIURE. कालनात्मान [वन्दात WSS 
| LY. 33 

हि Verily gx in this world ज्ञानेन by knowledge 
सदृशं like पवित्रे purifying न not विद्यते exists कालन 
in time योगसेसिद्धः reaching perfection by Yoga 
आत्माने in one’s own heart स्वयं oneself qa that 
knowledge) निन्दति realises. 

Verily there exists nothing in this world 
purifying like knowledge. In good time, having 
reached perfection in Yoga, one realises that 
oneself in one’s own heart, 


श्रद्धावांलभते ज्ञाने तत्परः संयतेन्द्रियः N 


ज्ञाने रूध्वा परां शान्तिमचिरेशाधिगच्छति ॥३६॥ 
IV. 39. 

DD The man of shraddhd तत्पर: devoted 

संयतेन्द्रियः the master of one's senses Arq knowl- 

cdge लभत. attains ज्ञानं knowledge लब्घ्या having 

attained SARN at once प्रां Supreme शान्ति peace 

अधिगच्छति goes. | 


ae 


37-41] OF ACTION IN KNOWLEDGE 108 


The man with shraddhé, the devoted, the 
master of one’s senses, attains ( this) knowl- 
edge. Having attained knowledge one goes at 
once to the Supreme Peace. 


अञ्ञश्चाश्रदधानञ्च संशयात्मा विनश्यति N 
नायं लोकोऽस्ति न परो न सुखे संशयात्मनः ॥४०॥ 
IV. 40. 

rz: The ignorant spxprqpa: the man without 
shraddhd संशयात्मा the doubting self विनश्याति goes to 
destruction संशयात्मनः of the doubting self अर्थ this 
लोक: world न not अण्ति is w« not sp and qc the next 
न not = and सुखं happiness. 


The ignorant, the man without skraddha, 
the doubting self, goes to destruction. The 
doubting self has neither this world, nor the 
next, nor happiness. 

[ The ignorani: one who knows not the Self. 


The man without shraidhdé : one who has no faith 
in the words and the teachings of his Guru. 

The doubling self has Cc: One of a doubting 
disposition fails to enjoy this world, owing to his 
constantly rising suspicion about the people, and 
things around him, and is also full oi doubt as 
regards the next world; so also with the ignorant 
aud the man without sAraddAd. | 


bas - 


योगसंन्यस्तकमोशा ज्ञानसंकिनसंशयम्‌ ॥ 
आत्मवन्तं न कमोणि निबघर्ति बनजय ॥४१॥ 
IV. AI. 


थनंजय O Dhananjaya योगसन्यस्तकर्माणं one who 
has renounced work by Yoga ज्ञावसंठित्नसंशर्य one 
whose doubts are rent asunder by knowledge 


‘194. SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


aratge poised in Self कर्माणि actions न not निदर्धान्त 
bind. 

With work renounced by Yoga, and doubts 
rent asunder by knowledge, O Dhananjaya, 
actions do not bind bim whe is poised in tne 
Self, | 
तस्मादज्ञानसंभूत दत्स्थं ज्ञानासिनात्मनः ॥ 
Rd tat योगमातिष्ठोतिठ भारत ॥४२॥ 

IV. ६2. . 

तस्मात Therefore आत्मनः of the Self ग्रज्ञानसंभतं 
born of ignorance ह्य residing in the heart एस 
flus aera doubt srarfar by sword of knowledee 
faem cutting apt Yoga आतिछ take refuge भाश्त 
O Bharata Jy arise. 

Therefore, cutting with the sword of knowl- 
edge, this doubt about the Self, born of 
ignorance, residing in thy heart, take refuge 
in Yoga. Arise, O Bhirata! 


इति ज्ञानकमन्थासयेगो नाम चतुर्थोऽध्यायः भ 
The end of chapter fourth, designated Tiin 


Way OF RENUNCIATION OF ACTION IN 
KNOWLEDGE. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ प्जमोऽ्व्यायः H 
FIFTH CHAPTER 
RHA उवाच di 


Aari केशां कृष्ण पुनयोगं च Tara di 
यच्छेय LATCH तन्मे ब्रहि सुनिश्चितम ॥१॥ 
Neon SE 

अर्जुन: Arjuna सवाच said : 

gem © Krishna smi of actions संन्यासं 
renunciation Ta: again योग performance * and 
gran commendest एतयों: of these two यस्‌ which 
sya: the better एकं one तत्‌ that ( एकं one) eared 
decisively मे to me gi tell. 

Arjuna said : 


Renunciation of actions, O Krishna, tho: 
commendest, and ‘again, its performance. 
Which is.the better one of these? . Do thou 
tell me decisively. 


| Iu IV. 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 32, 33, 37 and 4r, 
the Lord has spoken of the renunciation of ail 
actions; and in IV. 42 He has exhorted Arjuna’ t^ 
engage in Yoga, in performance o! action. | Owing 
to the mutual opposition between the two, which 
makes it impossible for one man Lo resort to both. 


106  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. $. 


of them at the same time, doubt arises in the mind 
of Arjuna, and hence the question as above. 

[ lis performance —“Y oga” inthe text: Yoga here 
and in the following verses means, Karma-Y oga.] 


श्रीसंगवानुचाच di 
v € ; (M A 
संन्यास: RAGA नि.श्रयसकरावुभा ॥ 
तयोस्तु कमेसंन्यासात्कमेयोगो विशिष्यते ॥२॥ 
Vota 

affaarate The Blessed Lord gar said : 

संन्यासः Renunciation कमयोगः performance of 
action च and उभो' both gaaet leading to fres- 
dom तयोः of those two तु but कमेसंन्यासात्‌ from 


renunciation of action कमय: performance of 


action विशिष्यते is superior. 

The Blessed Lord said : 

Both renunciation and performance of 
action lead to freedom : of these, performance 
of action is superior to the renunciation of 
action. 

[Performance of achon—is superior to mere 
renunciation (i.e., unaccompanied with knowledge) 


in the case of the novice in the path of spirituality. 
See the 6th sloka of this chapter.] 


ज्ञेय: स नित्यसन्यासी यो न दवेष्टि न काँचति॥ C 
fagrat हि महाबाहो सुख बन्यात्पमुच्यते ॥३॥ 
Ne A 

थः Who न not $f dislikes न not grafa likes सः 
he नित्यसन्यासी constant Sannyasi ğa: should be 
known महावाहो O mighty-armed fẹ verily निईम्बूः 
ene free from the pairs of opposites बन्धान्‌, from 
bondage सुख easily प्रमुच्यते is set free. 


I-5] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 107 


He should be known a constant Sannyas!, 
who neither likes nor dislikes: for, free from 
the pairs of opposites, O mighty-armed, he is 
easily set free from bondage, 

t Contin Sannyasi: he need not have takea 


Sannyas formally, but if he has the above frame ci 
mind, he is a Sannyasi for ever and ave. 


Neither likes" nor dislikes: Neither hates par 
and the objects causing pain. nor desires pleasure 
andthe objects causing pleasure, though engage } 
in action. | 


FETII : c r 
स्वाघ्यप[ग[ पूयग्वाला. प्रवदान्त न पाराडता: ॥ 
€. ^ ~ eo^ ~ 
पएकमप्या[स्थतः सम्यशुसयाचन्दत फलम्‌ iii 
Ve. dA 

वाला: Children सांख्ययोगो Sankhva (knowledge) 
and performance of action पृथक्‌ distinct : इलि this) 
yagla speak न not qfirgqr: the wise WR one आपि 
even सम्यक truly ग्रात्यितः established in उमयोः of 
both Wat iruit विन्दते gains. 

Children, not the wise, speak of knowledge 
and performance of action, as distinct. He 
who truly lives in one, gains the fruits of both, 

[ Children: the ignorant people devoid of :r- 
sight into tue purpose of the Shastra. ; 

a ~ - nA 00 £^. ha 
यत्साख्यः प्राप्यत स्थान Wu uw गम्यत d 

a ® * क ~ eo s 

एकं सांख्यं च योगं च य: पश्यति स पश्यति ॥५॥ 
* NV. 5 | 

सांख्यैः By the Jninins qa which स्थानं place प्राप्यत 
is reached योगे: by the Karma-yogins पि even 
aa. that गम्यते is reached य: who सांख्यं knowledge 


a T 


108 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap.5 


=z ind योग performance of action sy. and TR one 
वृश्यमि sees सः he पश्यति sees. 

The plane which is reached by the Jnànins 
is also reached by the Karma-yogins. Who 
sees knowledge and performance of action 
as one, he sees, 


संन्यासस्तु महाबाहो दुःखमाप्तुमयोगत: ॥ 
योंगयुक्तो मुनिश्नेद्य न चिरेणाधिगच्छति ॥६॥ 
V. 6. 

हावाहो O mighty-armed ग्रयोगतः without per- 
ermance OF action संन्यासः renunciation of action 
आप्र :० attain दुःख hard तु but योगयुक्तः devoted 10 the 
pata ot action मुनि: a man of meditation न्‌ not चिरेण 
uler along time | q चिरेण quickly) त्रह्म ७ Brahman 
APITA goes, 

Renunciation of action, O mighty-armed, is 
Hard to attain to without performance of 
action; the man of meditation purified by 
2६0६0: to action, quickly goes to Brahman. 


ids not, thar reuunciation ol. action based on 
iv " | 
%1५ “0३७. is nor superior to periormance of action 


Li ~ r 


न that nue latter method is easier, for a b ४16, 
Dei uaifies him far the hizher path, by purifying 


nis mini. Hence iis the proper, and therefore 
"uperor. COurse in 47s case 


I E ग्चद्यद्धात्मा Tataare त्मा जतान्द्रय: ॥ 
सलचसूतात्ममूतात्मा STAT न [लप्यते ॥ ड} 
Nar. “ह. 
यागयुत्तः: Devoted to the path of action विञ्चद्वात्मा 
4 Man of puritied mind वाजतात्मा one with the 


3-09] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 109 


body conquered जितेन्द्रिय: one whose senses are 
subdued TPLA ATAT one who realises his self as 
the Self in ail beings कुर्वन acting ऋषि though q not 
fac is tainted. 

With the mind purified by devotion to 
performance of action, and the body con- 
quered, and senses subdued, one who realises 
his self, as the Self in all beings, though act- 
ing, is not tainted, 


नेव किचित्करोमोति युक्तो मन्येत तत्त्ववित ॥ 
पश्यन्श्यरवन्स्पूशान्जतरत्ञश्नन्गच्छन्स्वपन्थ्वसना च्या 
TATU AGAT CAAT ATA ॥ 


a ह. hasy e ds. 
Sie TTT Fay deg इात ure ui ६ 
M. uou. Os 

युक्त; Centred (in the Self) srearaag the knower 
of truth पश्यन्‌ seeing xxx hearing epu touch- 
ing जित्रन्‌ smelling spam cane 3xpeg going खपला 
sleeping श्वसन breathing प्रलपन्‌ spcaking विसुजन 
letting-go Weary holding उन्मिषन्‌ opening (the eyes ) 
निमिषन्‌ closing (the eyes) आवि though gigy 
senses gfegA amongst sense-objects qef move 
इति this yya being convinced fam anything 
एब at all ने not करोन (1) do दाते this मन्येत should 
think. 

The knower of Truth, (being ) centred (in 
the Self} should think, “I do nothing at 
all "—though seeing, hearing, touching, smell- 
ing, eating, going, sleeping, breathing, speak- 
ing, letting-go, holding, opening and closing 


110 | SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 5. 


the eyes, —convinced that it is the senses that 
move among sense-obiects. 


! Re - ७ *- f^. 
SIEUT कमाण सग त्यक्त्वा करात यः ॥ 
लिप्यते न स पापेन पद्मपत्रमिवास्भखा॥१०॥ 


AS. ^p. 

यः Who क्रह्माण् in Brakman गआधाय resigning संग 
attachimeni AFE fersaking कमाणि actions mula 
does सः he अम्भसा by water gays lotus-leaf FE 
like qTga bv evil q not fare soiled. 

He who caes actions forsaking attachment, 
resigning them to Brahman, is net soiled by 
evil, ike unto a lotus-leaf by water 


' Evil: the results good and bad producing 
bondare 


WIA मनसा FAN केवलेरिन्द्रिय रापि ॥ 
योगिनः कनं कुवन्ति संगं त्यक्त्वात्म शुद्धये ॥११॥ 
Yo. IL 

यागिनः Devotees in the path of work zm attach- 
meL: aF torsakine आत्मशद्रयथ ior the purification 
ofthe hea कवले: only कायन by body मनसा by 
mind spp by intellect इन्द्रयः Ov senses wq even 
कर्मे ceu कुन्ति pertom, 

Devotees in the path of work perform 
action, only with body, mind senses, and 


Intellect, forsakine attachment, for the puri- 
fication of the heart $ 


kd D 


Cy aii Ee- without egotism or selfishness : 
TAPS to 0५1, mind, senses and intellect. ] 


युक्त: कर्मफलं त्यक्त्वा शान्तिमाप्तोति नैष्टिकीम॥ 


9-13] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 11} 


अयुक्त: MARCA फले सक्तो निवध्यते ॥१२॥ 
Ne Xm 

xw: The well-poised कर्मफलं fruit of action 
argar forsaking नष्टिकीं born of steadfastness शार्न्ति 
peace आमोति attains अयुक्त. the unbalanced काम- 
कारण led by desire wer in the fruit of action OR: 
( being ) attached <निवच्य॒ते is bound. 

The well-poised, forsaking the fruit ot 
action, attains peace, born of steadfastness ; 
the uirbalanced one, led by desire, is bound by 
being attached to fruit ( of action ) 

[ Born of steadfastness : Sankara explains narsthtk- 
i»: as meaning due to gradual perfection in the 
path of knowledge, having the following stages of 
development (1) purity of heart (2) gaiming 01 


knowledge (3) renunciation of action (4) steadiness 
in knowledge. | 


€ ee > H- ग ~ + N 

सवेकमाणा मनसा सन्यस्यास्त सुख वशा ॥ 
- M e A t 
नवद्वारे पुरे देही नेव कुबन्न कारयन ॥१३॥ 
Mac 13. 

यंशी Subduer ( of the senses) देहीं embodied soul 
अनसा by discrimination सर्वेकर्माशि all actions संन्यस्य 
having renounced मुख happily नवहार in the nine- 
gated पुरे city q not एव ४९7} कुर्वन्‌ acting न not ( एव 
verily) कारयन causing ( others ) to act Byres rests. 

The subduer (of the senses), having re- 
nounced all actions by discrimination, rests 
happily in the city of the nine-gates, neither 
acting, nor causing ( others ) to act. 


F All actions: ist, mifye, of obligatory—the 


5 cw 


performance of which does not produce any merit, 


413 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 5. 


but by non-pertormance produces demerit. 2nd 
naimiffifa, those arising on the occurence of some 
special events, as the birth of a son: these also are 
customary. 3rd, £impu—those intended for secur- 
ing some special ends: these are only optional, 
ath. ais iddha—cr torbidden. He rests happily in 
the body, seeing inaction in action: just exhaust- 
ing his prdraóddda—not relating or identifying him- 
self with anything of the dual universe. ] 


न wd AHA लोकस्य खूजति प्रभुः ॥ 
e IALL ew 
न कमफलसयाग स्वभावस्तु प्रवतते ॥१४॥ 
॥.. त, 

qa: The Lord लोकस्य for the world न neither 
कढत्वे agency q nor ATW actions न nor 
कर्मफलसंयोग union with the fruits of action सुति 
creates तु but स्वभावः (Nature) universal ignorance 
HAAA leads to action. 

Neither agency. noractions dees the Lord 
create for the world, nor (does He bring 
about) the union with the fruit of action. It 
is the universal ignorance that does (it all ). 


- " A e (C 
नादत्ते कस्यचित्पापं न चेव gsi Pn: d 
agaa ज्ञानं तेन Hala जंतवः ॥१५॥ 
Vo- I5 
विस्‌: Omnipresent कस्याचित्‌ of none qr demerit 
* not आदत्ते ikes gga merit च and not, Waraa 
by ignorance ज्ञानं knowledge ग्रावृतव enveloped तेन 
hence तदः beings षुह्यन्ति get deluded. 


_ The Omnipresent takes note of the merit 
or demerit of none. Knowledge is enveloped 
in ignorance, hence do beings get deluded. 


a 


13-17] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 115 


nh unmistakable words, Krishna describes the 
position of Iswara, or the Lord, in relation with the 
Universe, in these two verses 


He is all-blissful, all-perfect ; even the shadow of 
a motive or relation in Him, would be contradictory 
to His nature. Hiis mere proximity to Prakriti or 
Nature, eudues the latter wih power amd potency 
ot causing all that is. Jiva is bound so long as t 
relates itself to, and identifies itself with this Nature. 


When it ceases to do so, 1 attains freedom. ‘Fhe, 
whole teaching of the Gita, and therefore of the | 


ole Hindu Seripture on this subject, is condensed 
n the above, ] 


ज्ञानेन त तदज्ञानं येणा नाशितमात्मनः ॥ 


तषामादव्यबज्ज्ञान प्रकाशयात तत्परम्‌ ell 
V. 46. 

q But आत्मनः of Self जानेन by knowledge Gay 
whose qm that gart ignorance afar is destroyed 
तेषां their तल that grå knowledge qt the Supreme 
(Brahman ) आदित्ययल like the sun Yarran reveals. 

But whose ignorance is destroyed by the 
knowledge of Self—that knowledge of theirs 
like the sun, reveals the Supreme ( Brahman ). 


तहुदझयस्तदात्मानस्तात्रष्ठास्तत्पराख्णा: H 


गच्छम्व्यधुनराजूचि हञानतिधूतकल्मपाः ॥१७॥ 
M “गक 


वह Those who have theirintellect a! ed tu 
That garrafa: those whose self is That afer those 
who are steadfast in Chat qmm: those whose 
consummation is That gratae mat those whose 
mpurities have been shaken off by knowledge 
प्रपुनरावात्त non-re turn ग च्छा लत AA, 


114 . SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 5. 


Those who have their intellect absorbed in 
That, whose Self is That, whose steadfastness 
is in That, whose consummation is That, their 
impurities cleansed by knowledge, they attain 
to Non-return { Moksha ). 


; श्र "ES - Fo p. OF. 

विद्याविनयसंपन्ने ब्राह्मण गावि हस्तिनि ॥ 

शुनि चेव श्वपाके च परिडता: समदर्शिनः ॥ १८॥ 
Ma. d. 

qfirzar: The knowers of the Self एव verily 
विद्याविनयसंवद्ये in one endowed with learning and 
humility ब्राह्यण in a Brálimana vfq in a cow इस्तिनि in 
an elephant याने ina dog च and श्या in a pariah 
{ lit. one who cooks or eats a dog ) «p and समदर्शिनः 
iookers with an equal eye (T3183 become). 

The knowers of the Self look with an equal 
eye on a Bralimana endowed with learning 
and humility, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and 
a pariah. 

_ Because they can see nothing but the Self. It 
makes no difference to the sun whether it be 
reflected in the Ganges, in wine, in a small pool, or 
in any unclean itquidl: the same is the case with 


ine Seil No Upadhi (or limiting adjunct) can: 
attach to it. ; 


= स. Oe bat क E R 
इहेव तेजितः सर्गा येषां साम्ये खितं मनः॥ 
fo 8 e fs > ~ OW 
Taxi हि समे ब्रह्म ERIGI ते स्थिताः ॥१६॥ 

V. 19. 

ayt Whose मनः mind साम्ये in even-ness ह्यितं 
tied gg in this world एव verily q: by them सर्मः 
relative} existence जितः is conquered fẹ indeed ब्रह्म 
Brahman सुमे even fagit without imperfection तस्मात 


17-21] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 115 


therefore. ते. they ब्रह्माण in Brahman हया: are 
established. 

(Relative) existence has been conquered by 
them, even in this world, whose mind rests 
in even-ness, since Brahman ts even and with- 
out imperfectioiz: therefore they indeed rest 
in Brahman. 

Relative existence: AM bondage as of birth, death 
cic. All possibility of bondage is destroyed when 


the mini attains perfect even-ness, which in other 
words, means—becominy Brahman. ] 


न प्रह्मप्येत्प्रियं प्राप्य नोडजत्पाप्य चाप्रियम्‌ ॥ 
स्थरा द्वरस बूढा ्रझाचङ्गह्म।या [स्थतः ॥२०॥ 
Ve 20; 
agia Knower of Brahman नहांणि in Brahman 
reqa: established fegrqisa: one with intellect steady 

waa: undeluded श्रयं the pleasant yro receiving 
न not प्रहप्वत्‌ should iejoice ग्रं the unpleasant 
a and grey receiving न. not उठ्िज्वञिेत should be 
troubled, 

Resting in Brahman, with intellect steady, , 
and without delusion, the knower of Brahman 
neither rejoiceth in receiving what is pleasant, 
nor grieveth on receiving what is unpleasant. 


वाह्मस्पशंष्वसक्तात्मा विन्दत्यात्मनि यत्सुखम N 
स्र त्रह्मयोगयुक्तात्मा सुखमच्षयमश्चुत ॥२१॥ 
Nu. 2 
बाह्यस्पर्शेषु In the contacts (of the senses) with the | 
external objects ग्रसक्तॉत्मा one whose heart is un- 
attached अत्मनि in Self यत that सुखं joy विन्दति 


116 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | [ Chap. 5. 


revises @ he ब्रह्मयोगयुत्तान्मा heart devoted to 
meditation of Brahman अक्षय uudecaying सुख 
larpiness Spy attains. 

With the heart unattached to external 
objects, he realises the joy that is in tbe Self. 
With the heart devoted to -meditation of 
Brahman, he attains undecaying happiness. 

_ Heari— Antab-Karana. | 
2 Ly = TUA * d il छ ha: S 
य ह सस्पराजाः भागा ठु:ख्यानय एव त॥ 

€ EM -* [न्ये w क € " EA 
झऋायन्तवच्त "tT न du रमत uu: RRI 
V. 22. 

preva Q Konunteya ये which हि. verily संस्पर्णाजा. 
conuict-Dorn भोगाः enjoyments ते they gg 
penerators o£ misery एवं onb yaaga: with begin- 
niuy and end gy: the wise तेषु in them न not रमत 
Seka DHCASUCEC. 

Since enjovments that are contact-born 
are parents of misery alone, and with begin- 
ning and end, O son of Kunti, a wise inan 
goes not seek pleasure in them. 


शक्तोतीडेच य: सोडु ore शरीरविधोचणात ॥ 
MARTIRA JÅ स युक्त: स सुखी नर: ॥२३॥ 
१६ (र; 


a: Who saeua (abl. ) liberation from the 
1 a ee botere कामकाधोडव born of lust and anger 
बेस impuse gg in this world mq verily सोह to 
withstand SUED is able स: he युत्त. stead last in 
Yoga सः ie खुखी happy नरः man. 


21-25] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 117 


He who can withstand in this world, be- 
fore the liberation from the body, the impulse 
arising from lust and anger, he is steadfast (in 
Yoga), he is a happy man. 


यो्न्तःसुखोभ्न्तरारामस्तयान्तर्ज्यांतिरेव य: ॥ 
स योगी ब्रह्मनिवोशं ब्र्मभूतोऽघिगच्छाति ॥२४॥ 
No 24. 

यः Who spe: one whose happiness is 
within शन्तरारामः one whose relaxation is within 
तथा again यः who ञ्रन्तर्ञ्यातिः one whose light is 
within सः that योगी Yogi ब्रह्मभूतः becoming Brah- 
man ब्रह्मनिर्वाणं bliss in Brahman i. e., absolute 
ireedom अधिगच्छति gains. 

Whose happiness is within, whose relaxa- 
tion is within, whose light is within, that 
Yogi alone, becoming Brahman, gains absolute 
freedom. 

[ IFifAzn : In the Self. 

Absolute Freedom: Brahma-Nirvana. He attains 


Moksha while still living in the body. | 
w ~ ba A 
लभन्ते AATAA MBIT: क्षीशाकल्मषा: | 
~ A e Co 
PRASA यतात्मानः सवभूताहते TAT: ॥२५॥ 
V. 25. 
चीणकल्मधाः Those whose imperfections are ex- 
hausted छिन्द्वेधा: those whose doubts are dispelled 
यवाव्मान: those whose senses are controlled qa- 
भूतहिते inf the good of all beings रता: engaged ऋषयः 
Rishis त्रह्मनिर्वाणँ absolute freedom लभन्त obtain. 
With imperfections exhausted, doubts dis- 


pelled, senses controlled, engaged in the good 
ti 9 


118  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 5. 


cf all beings, the Rishis obtain absolute 
freedom. 
| Rishis: Men of right vision and. renunciation 


Kngaeed...... beings: Seeing his own Self in all, 
he cannot injure anyone 


The stages which lead to self-realisation are: 
Tirst, the purification of the mind, then. knowl- 
edge. then renunciation of allactions, and then 
comes Moksha. | 


कामक्रोधविचुक्तानां यतीनां यतचेतसाम्‌ d 
f ON LE und, ES U^ -" 
आसता ग्रह्मानवाण्‌ बतत वांदतात्मनाम EN 
V. 26. 
व्ामक्रोधवियुक्तार्ना Of those who have been released: 
from lust and anger ga Waar of those whose heart: 


is controlled fafzareqat of those who have realised 
Self यतीनां of the Sannyasis syftq: both here and. 


- Aereafter ब्रह्मनि absolute freedom qq exists. 


icm 
I ४ “ण 


Released from lust and anger, the heart 
controlled, the Self realised, absolute freedom. 
is for such Sannyasis, both here and hereafter.. 


स्पशान्ङ्त्वा बाहबाद्याश्चञ्च्चवान्तर परवा :॥ 
ATI Al समा कत्वा नासाफभ्यन्तरयारशो।॥। २७! 
यतःन्द्रयसनांचादसानमाचपरायणः ॥ 
विगतेच्छामयक्रोधो यः सदा सुक्त एक सः WAS 
V. 27. 28 

arata, External equa (contacts) objects afẹ 
outside) कृत्वा shutting out qg: eve च and war: of 
the (two) eyebrows spat in the middl yq thus 
नासाभ्यन्तरचारणा moving inside the nostrils प्राणा- 
पानी Currents of Prana and Apana सुमो. even कृत्वा 


25-29] THE WAY OF RENUNCIATION 119 


having made यत्तेन्द्रियननोबुद्धिः one who has con- 
trolled his senses, mind and intellect मोच्षषरायणश: 
one to whom Moksha is the supreme goal विशतेच्छा- 
wary: freed from desire, fear and anger यः 
who gf: man of meditation सः he सदा for ever 
मुक्त: free एव verily. l 

Shutting out external objects, steadying 
the eyes between the eyebrows, restricting 
the even currents of Prana and Apana inside 
the nostrils; the senses, mind, and intellect 
controlled, with Moksha as the supreme goal, 
freed from desire, fear and anger : such a man 
of meditation is verily free for ever. 

[ External objects: Sound and other sense-objects. 
External objects are shut out from the mind by not 
thinking of them. When the eyes are half-closed 
in meditation, the eye-balls remain fixed, and their 
gaze converges as it were, between the eyebrows. 
Prana is the out-going breath, Apana the in-coming ; 
the restriction described is effected by Pranayama. 

These two verses are the aphorisms of which the 
fullowing chapter is the commentary. | 


भोक्तारं WHATS सबलो कमहेश्वरम्‌ N 
सुहृदं सवेभूतानां ज्ञात्वा मां शान्तिसूच्छाति ॥२६॥ 
V. 29. 

यज्ञतपसां Of Yajnas and ascelicisms भोक्तारं 
dispenser सर्वलोकमहेश्वर great Lord of all worlds 
सर्वभूतानां of all beings sg friend मां me झात्वा 
knowing शान्ति peace ऋच्छति attains. 

Knowing me as the dispenser of Yajnas 
and asceticisms, as the Great Lord of all 
worlds, as the friend of all beings, he attains 
Peace, 


120 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GIFA — [Chap. r. 


_ Dispenser : Both as author and goal, the Lord is 
the dispenser of the fruit of all actions. 

friend: Doer of good without expecting any 
return, ` 

Las ae aa ia c I 
इत सन्यासयांगा नाम पञ्चसाऽव्याय: dd 

The end of the fifth chapter, designated 

Tur Way OF RENUNCIATION, 


Srimad- Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ षष्ठोष्व्याय: ॥ 
SIXTH CHAPTER 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 
N e - श्र € - df 
NAAA: HARA काय कम करात य: 
स संन्यासी च योगी च न निरभ्निने चाक्तरिय: ॥१॥ 
VI. r. 

भगवान्‌ The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

यः Who mama fruit of action yaaa: not 
leaning कार्य bounden कर्मे duty करोति performs सः 
he संन्यासी renouncer of action च and योगी devotee 


io action न not निरतिः one without fire न not = and 
afam: one without action 


The Blessed Lord said : 

He who performs his bounden duty with- 
out leaning to the fruit of action—he is a 
renouncer of action as well as a devotee to 
action: not he, who is without fire, nor he who 
is without action. 

f Bounden duty : Nityakarma. 


Renouncer of action aswell as a devotee to action : 
Sannyasi and Yogi. 

Without fre: He that has renounced actions 
enjoined by the Veda, requiring fire as adjunct e.g., 
Agnihotra 


122  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA Chap. 


ni 


Without action: He who has renounced actions 
which do not require fire as adjunct, such as 
austerities and meritorious acts like digging 
wells etc.) 

+ > न्यासर्मा FP 0 "Boe à f" (^. RIF 
य सन्यासामात MATT त fara पाणडव i 
a + MÅR? ~ -— PF € 
न हासल्यस्तसकरट्पा योगा भवात कञ्चन del 
VE. 2, धर 

पाणइत O Pandava sp which संन्यास renunciation 
eq this gre: said qd that यांग devotion to action 
विद्धि know f= for असंन्यस्तसंकन्पः one who has not 
forsaken Suaial/pa कञ्चन any one योगी a devotee to 
action न not yarq becomes. 

Know that to be devotion to action, which 
is called renunciation, O  Pàndava, for none 
becomes a devotee to action without forsaking 
Sankaipa 

_Sankalpa—is the working of the imaging 

acultv, forming fancies, makine plans, and again 
rushing them outside, conceiving future resul 

Starting afresh on a new line, leading to different 
issues, and so on and so forth. No one can be a 


Karma-Yogin ora devotee to action, who makes 
pans and wishes for the fruit of action. ] 


आरुरुक्षोमुनेयोंगं कमे कारणमुच्यते ॥ 
योगारूढस्य तस्येव शमः कारणमुच्यते ॥३॥ 
VI. 4. 

योग Concentration आरुरुत्षों: wishing to climb (i.e 
> aitain) yf: of the man of meditation कर्म work 
कारण Means उच्यते 15 said योगारूडस्य of one who 
nas attained concentration तस्य his TA: inaction 
एव verily कारणे way उच्यते is said. 

For the man of meditation wishing to attain 


1-53] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 123 


purification of heart leading to concentration, 
work is said to be the way: For him, when 
he has attained such (concentration), inaction 
is said to be the way. 

| Purification of the heart leading fo concentration—- 
Yogam. “Fora Brahmana there is no wealth dike 
unto (the eye of) one-ness, (and) even-ness, truc-ness, 
refinement, steadiness, harmlessness, straight- 
forwardness, and gradual withdrawal from all 
actton.”’—Mahabharata. Shanti Parva. 175, 35. ] 


यदा हि नेन्द्रियार्थेषु न कमस्वनुषजते N 
स्थथेसंकल्पसंन्यासी योगारुढस्तदोच्यते ॥४॥ 
VT 4. 

यदा When हि verily इन्द्रियार्थेषु in sense-objects 
RAY in actions न not अनुषज्जते is attached तदा 
then सर्पसंकल्क्सन्यासी renouncer of all Sankalpas 
योगाइह: to have attained concentration उच्यते is said. 

Verily, when there is no attachment, either 
to sense objects, or to actions, then is one said 
to have renouuced all Sankalpas, and attained 
concentration, | 


| «lffatned concentration: Y ogarádha. 


Jéenouncer of all Sankalpas: + O desire, T know 
where thy root lies: thou art born of sankalpa. 1 
shall not think of thee, and thou. shalt cease to 
exist, together with thy root. —Mahabharata. Sanii- 
parva. 177, 25. | 


उद्धरेदात्मनात्माने नात्मानमवसादरयेत्‌ ॥ 
A € A £7 
आत्मेव ह्यात्मनो बन्धुरात्मेव रिपुरात्मनः ॥५॥ 
Nike X 


आत्मना Dy self आत्मान oneself उ्धरेत should 
uplit न not (तु but) आत्मान oneself अवसादयेत should 


124 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap.6, 


deam down f& verily आत्मा self एव alone आतान 
c? oneself qag: friend आत्मा self एव verily आत्मनः 
cf oneself fxg: enemy. 

Let a man uplift himself by the Self. Let 
him not drag himself down. For the Self 
alone is the friend of the self And the self 
alone is the enemy of the Self. 


वन्धुरात्मात्सनस्तस्य येनात्मेवात्मना जत: di 


अनात्मनस्तु Was वततात्मव WA Hel 
ग. 6. 

येन By whom आत्मना by oneself एव verily आत्मा 
self जितः is conquered तस्य his आत्मा self श्रात्मन्‌ः of 
oneself qeg: friend तु but yaraq: of unconquered 
self आत्मा self एव verily waaa, like foe qued in the 
position of a foe qdq would remain. 

The Selfis the friend of the self, for him 
who has conquered himself by the Self. But 
to the unconquered seif, the Self is inimical, 
cand behaves) like fan external) foe. 

The Self is the friend of one, in whom the 
ggregzie of the body andthe senses has been 


ovunt under control, and an enemy when such 
n 


7 
L 
1 É t ne case 


जतात्मनः प्रशान्तस्य परमात्मा समाहितः di 


शाताष्णासुखदःखेघु तथा मानावमानयोः ॥७॥ 
Nue आ r 
जिनात्मन: Of the self-controlled प्रशान्तस्य of the 
scréne one प्रमात्मा the Supreme Self शीतोष्णसुख- 
Tag in cold and heat, pleasure and pain तथा as 


2:50 मानावमानयोः in honour and dishonour समाहितः 
à af ut ast फ़ 


5-9 | THE WAY OF MEDITATION 12% 


To the self-controlled and serene, the 
Supreme Self is the object of constant realisa- 
tion, in cold and heat, pleasure and pain, as 
well as in honour aud dishonour. 


[Hence he remains unruffled in pleasant and 
adverse environments. | 
जे 


ज्ञानविज्ञानतृप्तात्मा कूटस्थो विजितेन्द्रियः ॥ 
युक्त इत्युच्यते योगी समलोष्टाशमकाञ्चनः USN 
AU 38: 

ज्ञानविज्ञानतप्तात्मा One whose heart is satisfied by 
wisdom and realisation geen: unshaken विजितान्द्रयः 
who has conquered his senses समलाष्टाश्मक्काञ्जनः one 
to whom a lump of earth, stone, and gold are the 
same योगी Yogi zw steadfast इति this उच्यत्‌ is 
said. 

Whose heart is filled with satisfaction by 
wisdom and realisation, and is changeless, 
whose senses are conquered, and to whom a 
lump of earth, stone, and gold are the same : 
that Yogi is called steadfast. 

[ Wisdom—Jndna: knowledge of Sbastras. Reali- 
sating—Vijnana :in ones own experience of the 
teachings of Shastras. 

Changeless—like the anvil. Things are hammered 
and shaped on the anvil, but the anvil remains 
unchanged: in the same manner he is called 


Kutastha—whose heart remains unchanged though 
objects are present. | 


सुहन्मित्रायुदासीनमध्यस्थद्वेप्यवन्धुजु ॥ 
साधुष्वपि च पापेषु समबुद्धि विशिष्यते ॥६॥ 
OVL og. 
gaa Well-wisher मित्रं friends aft: foe उदासोनः 


136 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [Chap.6, 


the neutral मध्यस्थः the arbitor gem: the hateful 
weq: relative ( सुडन्मितार्थ्युदासीनभध्यस्यक्षेष्यवन्युपु in 
well-wishers etc.) साधुपु in the nghteous आपि even 
"Ww and पविबु in the unrighteous समृद्धि: one whose 
mind is even विशिष्यत avalias excellence. 

I Ie attatas excellence who looks with equal 
regard upon well-wishers, friends, foes, neutrals, 
and arbitors upon the hateful, the relatives, 
and upon the righteous and unrighteous alike, 
योगी gata सततभात्मानं रहास स्थितः ॥ 
WA यतांच त्तात्मा निराशीरपरियग्रहः ॥१०॥ 

Vie J0: 

योगी Yogi सततं constantly gzfq in solitude स्थितः 
Temaining एकाकी alone यंताचेचात्मा one with body 
and mind controlled faz[sft: free from hope gf- 
अहः free from possession rari gta should 
plactise concentration of the heart. 

Tae Yogi should constantly practice 
concentration ef the heart, retiring into soli- 
tude, alone, with the mind and body subdued, 
free from hope and possession, 


zr: देशे प्रतिष्ठाप्य स्विर्मासनमात्मनः॥ 
नात्युच्छितं बातिनीचं चेलाजिनकुशोत्तरम ॥ 
NT. तु) 
चो In the cleanly देणे spot आत्मनः one's own 
Ten tirm न not अत्युब्छित woo high न not आतिर्नीचं 
ton low ga aagi a cloth, a skin and Kusha 
grass arranged in consecution आसने seat प्रतिष्ठाप्य 


having established, 


Having in a cleanly spot established his 


913] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 127 


seat, firm, neither too high nor too low, made 
of a cloth, a skin, and Kusha-grass, arranged 
in consecution,— 

` Arranged in consecution: that is,—1he Kusha- 


grass arranged on the ground ; above that, a tigeror 
dear skin, covered by a cloth. | 


agati मनः छृत्वाप्यतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रिय: ॥ 
उपविश्यासने युञ्जयाद्योगमात्मावशुद्धये ॥१२॥ 
Wiz तळे. 

तत्र There आसने in the seat उपविश्य sitting मन: 
mind एकाग्र one-pointed great making यताचित्तेन्द्रिय- 
क्रिय: one who has subdued the actions of mind and 
senses आत्मविशुद्धये for the purification of the beart 
योगं Yoga युञ्जयात्‌ should practise. 

There, seated on that seat, making the mind 
one-pointed, and subduing the action of the 
imaging faculty and the senses, let him 
practise Yoga for the purification of the heart. 


समं कायशिरोग्रीवं धारयन्नचलं स्थिर: ॥ 
संग्रेक्य नासकाश्रं स्वं दिशश्चानवलोकयन्‌ ॥१३॥ 
: Whe हट मे 

कायशिरोगीब Body, head and neck सम treet 
ग्रचल still घारयन holding feat (being) firm F$ 
one's own नासिकां lip of the nose संप्रेक्ष्य gazing 
दिशः directions च and अनवलोकयन्‌ not looking. 

Let him firmly bold his body, head and 
neck erect and still, (with the eve-balls fixed, 
asif) gazing at the tip of his nose, and not 
looking around. 

| Gasing al the tip of Ais nose,— could not bg 


128 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [Chap.6 


literally meant here, because then the mind would 
be fixed oniy there, and not on the Self: when the 
eyesare half-closed in meditation, and the eye-balls 
are still, the gaze is directed, as 7/ were, on the tip 
of the nose. | 


प्रशान्तात्मा विगतभीब्रेह्मचारिबते स्थितः ॥ 
अनः MALT ATAU युक्तं आसीत मत्परः ॥१४॥ 
Vio डोके: 

प्रणान्तात्मा Serene-hearted  विगतभीः fearless 
ब्रह्म चारित्रते in the vow of a Brahmachari सथ: 
established मनः mind gary controlling faa: think-^ 
ing on me मृत्परः having me as the supreme goal 
युक्त: steadfast ग्रासीत should sit. 

With the heart serene and fearless, firm in 
the vow of a Brahmachari, with the mind 
controled, and ever thinking of Me, let him 
sit ‘in Yoga) having Me as his supreme goal, 
युंजन्नेवे सदात्मानं योगी नियतमानसः |i 

+ # € * + PN ~ 
शान्तिं निवाशपरमां मत्संखामघिगच्छति ॥१५॥ 
ML. 5. 

एवं Thus सदा always ग्रात्मानं mind युंजन keeping 
steadia-t नियतमातसः one with subdued mind थोगी 
Yogi निर्वाणपरमां that which culminates in Nirvana 
(Mokshai मत्संत्यां residing in me शान्ति peace 
PITS attains. 

Thus always keeping the mind steadfast, 
the Yogi of subdued mind, attains the peace 
residing in Me,—the peace which culminates 
iu Nirvana (Moksha). 


 नात्यश्चतस्तु योगोऽस्ति न चेकान्तमनश्वत:॥ 
न चातिखमशीलस्य जाग्रतो नैव ASA ॥१६॥ 


Ee 


13-18] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 129 


VI. 16. 
अर्जुन O Arjuna gama: of one who eats much 
न not योगः Yoga अस्ति is न्‌ not «p and एक्कान्तं at all 
saya: of one who does not eat q not * and 
ग्रतिल्रमशीलस्य of one who sleeps much s not sp and 
एव verily जायतः of the wakeful, 
(Success in) Yoga is not for him who eats 
too much or too little—nor, O Arjuna, for him 
who sleeps too much or too little, 


The Yogashastra prescribes: “Half (the 
stomach) for food and condiments, the third 


; quarter) for water, and the fourth should be reserved 


fur free motion of air.” ] 


युक्ताहारविहारस्य युक्तचेष्टस्य WT ॥ 


युक्तखप्नावबोधस्य योगो भवति दुःखहा ॥१७॥ 
VI. qp 

युक्ताहाराविहारस्य Of one who is moderate in eati ng 
and recreation (such as walking &c.) RAT in actions 
ुक्तचेष्टस्य of one who is moderate in effort (for work) 
यु्तस्तप्नावोंधस्य of one who is moderate in sleep 
and wakefulness दु-खहा' destructive of misery यागः 
Yoga qafa becomes. 

To him who is temperate in eating and 
recreation, in his effort for work, and in sleep 
and wakefulness, Yoga becomes the destroyer 
of misery. 


यदा विनियतं चित्तमात्मन्येवावतिपते ॥ 
निस्पृहः RRASA युक्त इत्युच्यते तदा ech 
VI. 18. 


यदा When विनियतं completely controlled चित. 
mind झात्मूनि' in the Self एवं verily अवतिएते rests 


130 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 6, 


तदा then सर्वकामेभ्यः from all desires निष्पूहः free 
from longing युक्त: steadfast इति this उच्यते is said, 

When the completely controlled mind rests 
serenely in the Self alone, free from longing 
after all desires, then is one called steadfast, 
(in the Self). i 


यथा दीपो निवातस्थो नंगते सोपमा ERAT ॥ 


he ~ 


योगिनो यतचित्तस्य युंजतो योगमात्मनः ॥१६॥ 
VL 19. 

यथा As निवातस्थः placed in a windless spot ety: 
lamp न not इंगते flickers ्रास्मनः of the Self याग 
concentration gaa: of the practising one a- 
चित्तस्य of one with subdued mind शिनः of the 
Yogi सा that उपमा simile evar is thought. 

“As a lamp ina spot sheltered from the 
wind, does not flicker,"—even such has been 
the simile used fora Yogi of subdued mind, 
practising coucentration in the Self. 


यत्रोपरमते चित्तं निरुद्धं योगसेवया ॥ 
यत्र चेवात्मनात्मानं पश्यज्नात्मनि तुष्यति ॥२०॥ 
सुखमात्यन्तिकं यत्तट्टाद्धिश्राह्ममतीन्ट्रियम्‌॥ 
वेत्ति यत्र न चेवायं स्थितश्चलति तत्त्वतः ॥२१॥ 
यं लब्च्वा चापरं लासं मन्यत नाविक ततः ॥ 
यस्मिन्स्थितो न दुःखेन गुरुणापि विचाल्यते॥२२॥ 
तं विद्यादुःखसंयोगवियोगं योगसज्ञितम्‌ ॥ 
^ स निश्चयेन योक्तव्यो योगोऽनिविणणचेतसा॥२३॥ 
VI. 20. 
यत्र In which state योगसेवया by the practice of 


18-23] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 131 


concentration fag absolutely restrained faa mind 
उपरमते attains quietude यत्र in which state * and 
ग्रात्मना by self apenra the Self पश्यन seeing आरर्त्मानं 
in the Self एव alone तुब्यति às satisfied. 

Vl. 21. 

(यत्र Where) अर्थ this यत्तत्‌ that which आत्यन्तिक 
ine gag} perceived by the intellect. अतीन्द्रिय 
uanscenling the senses ye bliss fap knows 
थत्र where च and स्थितं established aaqa: from one’s. 
real state not चलति departs. 

Xl. 282 

ये Which ल्लब्ध्वा having obtained ततः from that 
गप्रधिक superior अवर other apy acquisition न not 
मन्यते is regarded यस्मिन्‌” which स्थितः established 
गुरुणा by great दुःखेन sorrow आपि even न nor 
विचाल्यते is moved. 

VL. v. 

ते That दु खसंयोगावियोगं a state of severance from. 
the contact of pain rata called by the name of 
Yoga विद्यातू should know अनिर्विग्णचेतसा with un- 
depressed heart सः that योगः Yoga निश्चयेन with 
perseverance योक्तव्यः should be practised. 

When the mind, absolutely restrained by 

_ the practice of concentration, attains quietude, 
, and when seeing Self by the self, is satisfied 
‘in his own Self; when he feels that infinite 
biss—which is perceived by the ( purified DE 
intellect and which transcends the senses, and 
established “wherein he never departs from ` 
his real state; and having obtained which, . 
no other acquisition is regarded superior to . 
that, and where established, he is not moved : 


E 


even by heavy sorrow ;—let that be known as | 


Te ee ee पन. 


132 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap.G. 
the state, called bv the name of Yoga,—a 
state of severance from the contact of pain. 
This Yoga should be practised with persever- 
ance, undisturbed by depression of heart. 


aite, 

Which is perceived a... intellects Which the 
purified intellect can grasp independently of the 
senses. When in meditation, the mind is deep! 
won entrated, the senses do not function, and are 
resolved into their cause,—that is, the mind, and 
when the later is steady, so that there is only the 
intellect functioning, orin other words, cognition 
(n v. exists, the indescribable Self is realised. ] 


स्करपप्रभवान्कामांस्त्यकत्वा सर्वानशेषतः N 
मनसंवेन्द्रियश्रामं विनियस्य समंततः ॥२४॥ 
Wie. 245 
संकल्पप्रभवान्‌ Born of Sankalpa सर्वान्‌ all कामान्‌ 
cusiren STAT: without reserve agf abandoning 
मनसा bv mind एव alone pea: from all sides 
stezami group of senses विनियम्य completely . 


restraining, 


Lone 


Abandoning without reserve all desires born 
ef Sankaipa, and completely restraining, by 
the mind atone, the whole group of senses 
from their objects in all directions, 


Ue -रानसुपरसहुद्छा चातगहातया N 


आत्मसंस्थं मनः कत्वा न किचिदपि चिन्तयेत्‌ २५ 
IV. 23. 

घृतिगृहीतया Set in patience बुद्धया by the. intellect 

मनः mind ग्रात्नसंस्थ placed in the Self कृत्वा making 

शनेः शनेः by degrees उपरमेत्‌ should attain quietude 

न ro: [काचत anything sq even चिन्तयेत्‌ should 


LAM : i] T. 
ios dad 


24-27] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 133 


With the intellect set in patience, witn 
‘he mind fastened on the Self, let him 
attain quietude by degrees: let him not think 
of anything. 

», wW€- 02 an * € 
यता यता फिश्च रात सनचश्चचलमास्थरम्‌ | 

- a A v e च 
eedat एनयस्यंतदात्मन्यव वश नयत्‌ ॥२६॥ 
VI. 26. 

saa Restless अप्यिरं unsteady मनः mind यतः यल: 
from whatever (reason) [निश्चरति wanders away aa: 
xa: from that gaa this ( मन्तः mind) नियम्य curbing 
xr in the Self एव alone ay subjugation spare. 
should bring. 

Through whatever reason the restless, un- 
steady mind wanders away, let him curbing it 
from that, bring it under the subjugation of 
the Self alone. 


घ्रशान्तमनसं होने योगिनं सुखमुत्तमम ॥ 
उपति शान्तरजसं ब्रह्मभूतमकट्मषम्‌ ॥२७॥ 
VI. 27. 

प्रशान्तमनसे One of perfectly tranquil mind 
शान्तरजसं one whose passions are quieted ग्रकल्मध 
one who is free from taint ब्रह्ममूतस Brahman- 
become mq this योगिन Yogin हि verily उत्तमं suprem e 
zu bliss जपति comes. 

Verily, the supreme bliss comes to that Yogi, 
of perfectly tranquil mind, and passions 
quieted, Brahman-become, and freed from taint. 


[ Brahman-become 7. e., one who has realised that 
all is Brahman. 
Jaint—of good and evil. ] 


IQ 


154 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [ Chap.6, 


यंजनेवं सदात्मानं योगी विगतकत्मष: jj 
सुखिन त्रह्मसेस्पशेमत्यन्तं खुखमञ्च॒ते ds 
VE 28. 
एवं Thus सदा constantly आसान mind FHT en- 
ng विगतकल्मषः freed from taint aptt Yoo 


1 wh dui 


irahman अत्यन्तं intense खुख bliss WAT attains, 

The Yogi freed from. taint (of good and 
evil, constantly engaging the mind thus, with 
case attains the infinite bliss of contact with, 
Pramas. 


सचभूतस्थमात्मानं सवसूतानि चात्मनि ॥ 


fud योगयुक्तात्मा GAT समदशनः tli 
» VL 20. 

यागयुक्तात्मा One whose heart is steadfast in Y 0४४. 
सवत्र everywhere समदशन: one who sees the same 
आत्माव Sei सर्वेभूलस्थ abiding in all beings सवभूतानिः 

Deihngs च and आल्मनि in the Self aq sees 

With the heart concentrated by Yoga, with. 
tie eve or even-ness for all t ungs, he beholds 
tne Self in all beings and all beings in. tl 
Seif 


यो मां पश्यति aa सर्वे च मयि पश्याति। 
तस्या न ्रणश्यामि स च मे न प्रणश्यति laci 
VI 30 
यः Who मा me सर्वत्र everywhere पश्यति sees मयि 


9 me चच and सर्व everything qma sees तस्य his 


70 him) आह्‌ I न not मणश्याम vanish स: he sp and मे 
niy tO me) q not प्रणश्याव vanishes 


28-32] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 135 


He who sees Me in all things, and sees all 
things in. Me, he never becomes separated 
from Me, nor do I become separated from 
him. 


| Separated, i. e by time, space, or anything 
intervening. | 


सवेभूतस्थितं यो मां भजत्येकत्वमास्थित: li 

e e - ON ~ i A tTa [ 
सवथा बतसानाशप स यागा माय वतत ॥३१। 

Vl E 

q: Who सर्वभूतस्थितं dwelling in all beings qf me 
mae unity ग्रात्यितः established भञ्जति worships 
सर्वथा in every way वर्चमानः remaining आपि even सः 
that योगी Yogi मथि in me वर्तते abides. | 

He who worships Me, dwelling in all beings, 
being established in unity, whatever his mode 
of life, that Yogi abides in Me. 

[ Worsheps Afe : realises Me as the Self of all. 

Established in unity, 1. e, having resolved all 
duality in the underlying unity. ] 


e. 


आत्मोपस्येन सवच समं पश्यति urs ॥ 


सुखं वा यदि वा दुःखं स योगी परमो मत: dad 
VI. 32. 

अर्जुन O Arjuna sp who सर्वच everywhere सुखं 
pleasure qp or यदि if ar or दुःख pain आत्मौपम्येन by 
comparison with himself सम the same पश्यति sees 
सः that qnit Yogi परमः highest qq: is regarded. 

He who judges of pleasure or pain every- 
where, by the same standard, as he applies 
to himself, that Yogi, O Arjuna, is regarded’ 
as the highest, 


136 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 6. 


C Seeing that whatever is pleasure or pain to him- 
self,is alike pleasure or pain to all beings. he, 
the highest of Yogins, wishes good to all and evil to 
none,—he is always harmless and compassionate 
to all creatures. | 


WHA उवाच di | 
योऽयं योगस्त्वया प्रोक्तः साम्येन-मधुसूदन ॥ 
एतस्या न पश्यामि चंचलत्वात्स्थिति स्यिराम ३३ 

VI. 32, 

sq: Arjuna उवाच said: 

मधुसूदन O slayer of Madhu त्वया by thee साम्यन 
by unity or evenness यः which अयं this योगः Yoga 
qi: said एतस्स its स्थिरा lasting स्थिति endurance 
चंचलल्दात्‌ from restlessness FEI न not पश्यामि see. 

Arjuna said : 

This Yoga which has been taught by Thee, 
G slayer of Madhu, as characterised by even- 
ness, I do not see (the possibility of) its 
lasting endurance, owing to restlessness ( of 
the mind ) 


चंचलं हि मनः कृष्ण प्रमाथि बलवद्दढम ॥ 
c 
तस्याह [d सचय वायारव सुट्ष्करम ॥३३॥ 
VI. 34. 

कृष्ण O Krishna हि verily मनः mind spar restless, 
Sum turbulent qaqa, strong ré unyielding gë £ 
हृस्य of that निमहे control वायो; of the wind, इव like. 
सुदुष्करं difficult to do qe regard. e 
. Verily, the mind, O Krishna, is restless, 
turbulent, strong, and unyielding ; I regard it 


quite as hard to achieve its control, as that of 
the wind, 


32-36 | THE WAY OF MEDITATION 137 


| < Krishna, is derived from ‘ Krish, to scrape: 
Krishna is so called, because He scrapes or draws 
away all sins and other evils from His devotees. ] 


श्रीमगवाडुवाच N 
असंशयं महाबाहो मनो दुनिग्रहं WAT di 
अभ्यासेन तु BAT वेराग्येश च गह्यते ॥३५॥ 


MI. 335. 
आ्रभगवान The Blessed Lord gary said : 
महाबाहो O mighty-armed मनः mind हुर्निश्रहं diffi- 
cult of control wat restless असंशय undoubtedly तु 
but कान्तेय O son of Kunti अन्यासत by practice 
quu by renunciation च and agra is restrained. 
The Blessed Lord said: 


Without doubt, O mighty-armed, the mind 
is restless, and difficult to control; but through 
practice and renunciation, O son of Kunti, it 
may be governed. 

| C. E Patanjali I. 12. 

Practice: Earnest and repeated attempt to make 
the mind steady in its unmodified state of Pure 


Intelligence, by means of constant meditation upon 
the chosen Ideal. 


Renunciation: Freedom from desire, for any 
pleasures, seen or unseen, achieved by a constant 
perception of evil in them. ] 


असेयतात्मना योगो दुष्प्राप इति मे Ala: N 
वश्यात्मना तु यतता श्कयोऽवाप्षमुपायतः ॥३६॥ 


VI. 36. 
असंयतात्मना By a man of uncontrolled self योग: 
Yoga दुष्प्रष hard to attain इति this में my मातः 
conviction वश्यात्मना by the seli-controlled one तु 


138 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 6. 


Dur उपायतः by right means यतता by the striving one 
अवाप्नु io obtain शक्यः possible. 

Yoga is hard to be attained by one of un- 
controiled self: such is my conviction ; but tse 
-eit-controiled, striving by rioht means, can 
Dotan it. है 

अर्जुन उवाच ॥ 
अर्यातः श्रद्धयोपेतो योगाच्चलितमातस: di 
HIT यागसासाद का गात BAT TRANS Sl 
xd d 
अजुन: 7७०३ उवाच said: 

Faq Krishna spar by Shraddha उकल: possessed 
अयान: uncontrolled यागात्‌ from Yoga चलितमानसः 
whose mind wanders away योगर्स्सिद्धि per 
onim Yoza अप्राप्य not gaining Wf which शात. end 

गनात्‌ Meets 

Ariuna said: 

Though p d of Shraddha but unab 
to coutroi himself, with the mind wancerin 

६ 


du 


oy 


~ 


"irom Yoga, what end does one, 531153 
ion in Yoga, meet, O Krishna 2 


काचच्रासयविश्नएश्रुक्ञा्रमिव नश्यालि ॥ 


अप्रतिष्ठो महावाहा विसूदो ब्रह्मणः पथि dac 
Wis. ३३. 
मदावाहा £} mighty-armed ब्रणः of Brahman wf 
in the path fque: deluded SIMs: supportless 
WAAS: ianen trom both छिन्न rent art cloud za 
uke न्‌ not agaia perishes काचित paricle implying 
AES ON 


Does he not, fallen from both , perish, without 


36-40] THE WAY OF MEDITATION i239 


support, Hke a rent cloud, O mighty-armed 
deluded in the path of Brahman? 


Fallen from both: That is, from both the paths 
knowledge and action. | 


way संशय कृष्ण च्छेत्तमहेस्यरोषतः d 
स्वव्यः संगयस्य़ास्य च्छेत्ता न ह्युपपद्यते ॥३६॥ 
YE 39. 

zpenup O Krishna 3 mv एवल this संशय doubt ENTE 
completely vawr to dispel agfa art justified sey 
Sint thee wey of this gyaez doubt sar dispeller 
my nol Te verily उपपद्यते is fit. 

This doubt of mine, @ Krishna, Thou 
*houldst completely dispel; for it is not 
possible for any but Thee to dispel this doubt. 





: Since there can be po better teacher than the 
‘Omniscient Lord. | 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 

et AS, e 4. क. 
साय नवह ATA एवनाशस्लस्य [व्यत il 
a gn. = है a e d 3 
नहि कल्याशाकत्कश्विद्दगति ara गच्छाते ॥४०॥ 

Vl. 40. 
zip The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

arg O son of Prithá न not wg verily gg here q not 
"pw hereafter weg his विनाशः destruction fae is 
vary O my son f£ verily कल्याणकृत्‌ doer of good MEE 
any aaa bad state, hence grief q not Tesla 2०९५. 

The Blessed Lord said : 

Verilv, O son of Prithá, there is destruction 


for him, neither here nor hereafter: for, t! 
doer of good, O my son, never comes to grief. 


140 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 6 


_ Téfa—son. A disciple is looked upon as a son. 
Arjuna is thus addressed having placed himself ir 
the position of a disciple to Krishna. | 


घाप्य पुणयकृतांलोकाचुषित्वा शाश्वतीः समाः dd 


शुचीनां श्रीमतां मेहे योगभ्रष्टोऽमिजायते ॥४१॥ 
VI. 41. 

योगभ्रष्टः One fallen from Yoga पुणयकृर्ता of the 
riohteous लोकान worlds grex having attained शाश्वतीः 
eternal समाः vears उषित्वा having dwelt great oi 
the pure श्रीमता of the prosperous भई in the home 
अभिजायते reincarnates. 

Having attained to the worlds of the 
righteous, and dwelling there for everlasting 
years, the fallen in Yoga, reincarnates in the 
home of the pure and the prosperous, 

_ Lverlasiing vears—not absolutely, meaning à 
very long period. | 
अथवा योगिनामेव कुले भवति भीमताम ॥ 
एताद्धि दुलभतरं लोके जन्म यदीइशम ॥४२। 

VI. 42. 

अधवा Or घीमता of the wise योगिना of the Yogis 
एव verily कुले in the family भवाति is born $sf such 
यस्‌ which जन्म birth waa this हि verily लोके in the 
world दुलेभतरं very rare to obtain. 

Or else he is born into a family of wise 
Yogis only; verily, a birth such as that, is 
very rare to obtain in this world. 


i Very rare: more dificult than the one mentioned 
in the preceding sloka. | 


तत्र ते बुद्धिसयोगं लभते पोवेदेहिकम ॥ 
TAA च ततो भूयः संसिद्धो कुरूनन्दन ॥४३॥ 


40-44] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 141 


VI 43. 

qx There पोवदोरकं acquired in his former bods 
से that बुद्धिसंयोग union with intelligence लभते gains 
कुरुनन्दन O son ofthe Kurus = and qq: than tha‘ 
भूयः more संसिद्धी for perfection यतते strives. 

There he is united with the intelligence 
acquired in his former body, and strives more 
than before, for perfection, O son of the 
Kurus. 





£ Samskára: Store of experience in 
the shape of impressions and habits 


Strives..... perfection: Strives more strenuously 
to attain to higher planes of realisation than those 
acquired in his former birth. | 

e क ~ aA Lanes - 6 Z 
पूवाभ्यासन तेनव [इयत aans स: ॥ 
ज़ज्ञासुराप योगस्य शब्दत्रह्मांतचतत ॥४४॥ 

No Ede 

q By that एव verily yaraga previous practice 
अवशः helpless अपि even gr: he f&xtq is borne apea 
of Yoga जिज्ञासुः enquirer zifq even शब्दब्रह्म Word- 
Brahman (the Vedas) ग्रांतिवर्तते goes beyond. 

By that previous practice alone, he is borne 
on in spite of himself. Even the enquirer 
after Yoga, rises superior to the performer of 
Vedic actions. 

Borne on in spite of himself: carried to the goal 
of the course which he marked out for himself in 
his last incarnation, by the force of his former 
Samskáras, though he might be unconscious ei 
them—or even unvilling, to pursue it, owing to ine 
interference of some untoward Karma. 


Rises &c : lit. goes beyond the Word-Brahman, 
i. e., the Vedas. | 


142  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap. 6, 


घयल्लायतमानस्लु योगी संशुद्ध किल्बिष:॥ 
अनेकजन्मसंसिद्धत्ततों याति परां गतिम eu 
Nd. अर. 
तु But gagra with assiduity यतमात striving योगी 
संशुद्धा ऊ लव: purined of taint IRNAN E: 

perfected through many births qq: then प्रा supreme 
राति goal याहि 8121173. i 

The Yezi striving assiduously, purified of 
taint, gradually gaining perfection through 


at 


1७ births, then reaches the highest goal 
AT AIA TA योगी ज्ञानिभ्योषपि मतो धिक: 
कार्मेभ्यञ्चाथिको योगी तस्माद्योगी सवाजुन ४६ 
१1... ate; 

यागी Yogi तपस्विभ्यः than ascetics आधिक: superior 
aag: then the learned दूषि even आवक: superior 
कर्मिभ्यः then rke performers of action च and योगी 
Yosi mp ऽप eror मतः deemed तस्मात therelore 
अजुन 0 7८८२ योगी Yogi भव be. 

The Yogi is regarded as superior to those 
who praciise asceticism, also to those who 
have obtained wisdom (through the Shastras). 


. + 


'e 
ITe is aiso superior to the performers of action, 
! enjoined in the Vedas). Therefore, be thou 
a Your, (3 Arjuna! 

rim: Knowledge from precepts, but not 
direct insight into the Divine Truth. | 


गानामाप सवदा सह तनान्तसात्मना ॥ 


श्रद्धावान्मजत या मां स मे aur मत. 1४5 
VE. 49. 
e: Who sgrara. endued with Shraddhà भद्ञतेन 


45-47] THE WAY OF MEDITATION 143 


absorbed in me पअरन्तरात्मना with inner self af me 
'भजते worships सः he G by me wagt of all योगीनाम 
Yogis आपि even युक्ततमः most steadfast मतः re- 
garded. 

And ef all Yogis, he who with the inner 
self merged in Me, who with Shraddha 
devotes himself to Me, is considered by Me, 
as the most steadfast 

Of all Fovis—of al Yogis he who devotes 
himself to the All-pervading lufinite, is superior to 


4hose who devote themselves to the lesser ideals, or 
rods, such as Vasu, Rudra, Aditya, etc. | 


इति ध्यानयोंगो नाम षष्टोऽध्यायः d 


The end of the sixth chapter, designated 
TIIE WAY OF MEDITATION. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ सप्तमोऽष्यायः ॥ 
SEVENTH CHAPTER 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 
मथ्यासक्तमनाः पार्थ योगं युंजन्मदाश्रय: di 
भ्रसंशर्यं QAH मां यथा ज्ञास्यसि ATSU ॥१॥ 
VIE ' उ. 
samara The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 


पार्थं O son of Pritha मथि in me आसक्तमना: with 
mind intent on me Waray: taking refuge in me 
अगं Yoga युंजन practising समग्र wholly मा me 
असंशय doubiless यथा how ज्ञास्यसि shall know तत 
that ayay hear. 

The Blessed Lord said: 


With the mind intent on Me, O son of 
Yrithà, taking refuge in Me, and practising 
Yoga, how thou shalt without doubt know 
Me fully, that do thou hear. 


_ fully L e. possessed of infinite gfeatness. 
sirength, power, grace, and other infinite attributes. 


शान तप सविज्ञानमिदं वक्ष्याम्यशेषतः ॥ 
यज्ज्ञात्वा नेह भूयो$न्यज्ज्ञातन्यमवशिष्यते ॥२॥ 


1-4 ] SEVENTH CHAPTER 143 


VIL. 2 

ge lato thee सविज्ञानं combined with realisa 
tion g& this ज्ञानं knowledge आअशषतः in full वक्ष्यास 
shall tell यत्‌ which ज्ञात्वा having known gg here 
Wa: more अन्यत anything else ज्ञातव्य what ought to 
be known # not अवाशिष्यते remains 

I shall tell you in full, of knowledze, 
speculative and practical, knowing which, 
nothing more here remains to be known. 


| Nothing more—because he who knows the 
Reality, becomes Omniscient. ] 


मनुष्याणां सहस्रेषु कश्चियतति सिद्धये d 
यततामपि सिद्धानां कश्चिन्मां वेत्ति तत्वतः ॥३॥ 
VIL. 3s 

मनुष्याणां Of men सहस्रेषु among thousands कश्चि 
some one सिद्धय for perfection यर्तात strives aaaf 
of the striving ones सिद्धानां of the blessed ones wi 
even कश्चित्‌ some one मां me तत्त्वतः in reality चक्ति 
knows. 

One, perchance, in thousands of men, 
strives for perfection; and one, perchance, 
among the blessed ones, striving thus, knows 
Me 1n reality 

| The Blessed: Siddhinam—this word literally 
means the perfected ones—but here it means only 


those who acquiring good Karma in a past incarna- 
tion, strive for freedom in this life. ] 


भूमरापोऽनलो वायुः खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च ॥ 


अहंकार इतीयं मे भिन्ना euer ॥४॥ 
VII 4. 
भूमिः Earth आपः water अनलः fire वायुः air खं ether 


६६6. THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE— [Chap. 7. 





qq: mind बुद्धि: intellect एवं verily अईकारः egoism 
sg and eff thus gą this मे my seyr eightfold 
frat divided waa: Prakriti, the Maya belonging 
to the Ishwara. 


Bhumi / earth), Apa ( water), Anala (fire) 
Vayu (air), Kham (ether), mind, intellect, 
and egoism : thus is My Prakriti divided eight- 
fold. 


| The raison d'étre of this reduction of matter 
into five elements, is quite different. from that 
conceived by modern science. Man has five senses. 
only, just five ways in which he can be affected by 
matter, therefore his perception of matter cannot 
be divided further. The five elements are of two 
kinds, subtle and gross. The gross state is said 
to be formed by taking half of a subtle element, 
and adding 2th to it, of each ofthe rest: e, g., 
gross Akásha — i subtle Akasha +$th subtle Vayu,. 

ith subtle Tejas, + th subtle Apah,--$th subtle 
Bhumi. Then again, the ether, air, light, water, 
and earth of modern science, do not answer to the 
five elements of Hindu philosophy. Akashais just 
the sound-producing agency. From  Akásha 
rise Vayu, haying the properties of sound and 
touch. From Vayu springs Tejas, possessing the 
property of visibility, as well as those of its 
predecessors. From Tejas rises Apah, combining 
with the above properties its distinctive feature,— 
flavour. Bhumi comes from Apah, bringing. the 
property of smell to its inheritance. ] 


अपरेयमितरत्वन्याँ प्रकृति विद्धि मे पराम्र ॥ 
जीवभूतां महावाहो ययेदं घायेते जगत्‌ NW: 
| Vile. हु: 
तु But इये this अपरा lower इतः from this अल्या dif- 
ferent जीवभूतां the very life-element में my qu higher 


4-7 ] —WITH REALISATION 147 


Sq Prakriti बिद्धि know महावाहों O mighty-armed 
खया by which g& this जगत universe घायते is 
Sustained. 

This ts the lower (Prakriti). But different 

\ / 

from it, know thou, O mighty-armed, My higher 
Prakriti—the principle of selfconsciousness,, 
by which this universe is sustained. 


[ The former Prakriti is lower, being productive 
of evil, itself constituting the bondage of Samsâra.“ 


पतद्योनीनि भूतानि सवोशात्युपभारय॥ 
WE HALT जगत: प्रभव: प्रलयस्तथा NEN 
VIL 6. 

सवाणि All भूतानि beings एततयोनीनि those of which 
these two (Prakntis) are the womb दाते. this 
उपधारय know we 1 gie of the whole जगतः 
universe प्रभव: source तथा and also प्रलयः dis- 
solution. 

Know that these (two Prakritis } are the 
womb of all beings. I am the origin and dis- 
solution of the whole universe. 

| Z am the origin Cc : In Me the whole universe 


originates and dissolves, as everything springs from. 
My Prakriti. ] 


मत्तः परतरं नान्यत्किचिदास्त घनंजय ॥ 
मयि सवेमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव NI 
i कया. अ. 
घनंजय O Dhananjaya मत्तः than me wat higher 
अन्यत्‌ else किचित्‌ aught न not अस्ति ऽ सूत्रे ina 


thread मणिगणाः a row of jewels gq like g this. 
aq all मयि in me प्रोत is strung. 


74$ SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GIT [ Chap. 7 


Me. O Dhananjaya, there is naught. 
strung in Me, as a row of jewels on 


^ TO iS 

DE 5 Ye—there is no other cause of the uni- 
"६००४ ! RC Me. _ 

< A - £e ~ ९ ० , 
TANIA कान्तय प्रसाञस्म शाराखूयया.: ll 
Zara: सवेबेदेपु शब्दः खे died TF SH 


VIL ले, 
कोन्तय O von of Kunti अहे I अप्स in waters रसः 
६८. city शाशसययोः in moon and sun war: radiance 
mim in ul the Vedas gaa: syllable Om Ẹ in 


२१-००: शब्द: sound qq in men पोरुषं humanity शास्मि 


I am the sapidity in waters, O sun of Kunti; 
tae radiance in moon and sun; I am the 
"bie Om in ali the Vedas, sound in Akasha, 
and the indweling in mankind, 


Iu rdixs—Paurusham : the state of the Purusha 


er inlsehneri:ihe Indwelling of the Self makes the 
L3a3in-nessj7n mankind 


iu Me as essen il these are woven, as being 


पुरयो ira: पृथिव्यां च तेजश्चास्मि विभावसो di 
जीवनं UU तपश्चास्मि तपास्तिषु ॥६॥ 
VIL 9. 
च And yet in earth gwa: sacred amy 
fragrance ऋ and विभावतो in fire तेज: brilliancy ga- 


p 


Au in all beings जीवनं life «p and aA inc 
2-1८5 तपः austerity आस्मि (I ) am 


i am the sacred fragrance in earth, and the 


7-11] SEVENTH CHAPTER 149 


brilliance in fire am I; the life in all beings, 
and the austerity am I in ascetics, 
+ क + €. e 
बीजं मां सवेभूतानां विद्धे पाथे सनातनम्‌॥ 
बाद्धिबुद्धिमतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामद्दम ॥१०॥ 
VIL 10. 

पार्थ O son of Pritha माँ me सर्वभूतानां 0 all beings 
सनातनं eternal वीज seed विद्धि know बुद्धिमतां of the 
intelligent बुद्धि: intellect q@siféqat of the heroic तज्ञः 
heroism अहे I ञआह्मि am. 

Know Me, O son of Pritha, as the eternal 
seed of all beings. Iam the intellect of the 
intelligent, and the heroism of the heroic, 


बलं बलवतामास्म कामरागविवार्जेतम ॥ 


घमाविरुद्धों भूतेषु कामोऽस्मि भरतर्षभ ॥११॥ 
VIL 11. 

भरतर्षभ O bull among the Bháratas (sz D) वलवतां 
ofthe strong कामरागाववाजत devoid of desire and 
attachment वले strength आस्मि am भूतेषु in beings 
'घर्माविरुद्धः unopposed to Dharma कामः desire अस्मि 
( I) am. 

Of the strong, J am the strength devoid of 
desire and attachment. I am, O bull among 
the Bháratas, desire in beings, unopposed to 
Dharma. 

| Destre—Kéma : thirst for objects not present to 
the senses. 


Attachment—kéga: for those presented to the 
senses. 
Unopfosed to Dharma: the desire simply for 
the bare maintenance of life, certainly not that 
II 


sft THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE— [Chap. 7. 


«hich causes thirst and attachment for sense- 


o ects. p 
ये चेव सात्विका भावा राजसास्तामसाश्च ये ॥ 


w ms ane m~ क. X ~ Co 
मत्त एवेति arata a त्वहं तेषु त माय ॥१२॥ 
Vio वटे. 

य Whatever च and एव verily साव्िकाः belonging 
tc, Sativa भावाः states च and ये whatever राजसाः 
belonging to Rajas तामसा; belonging to Tamas 
ara them qw: proceeding from me एव verily इति 
t.» विद्धि know g but yz 1 WW in them न not a 
[12५ मयि in me. 

And whatever states pertaining to Sattva, 
and those pertaining to Rajas, and Tamas, 
know them to proceed from Me alone; still 
I am not in them, but they arein Me. 

“All things are in Him, yet not He in them. 
Logicaily, this can only happen in super-imposition 
trough illusion: as that of a ghost seen in the 
giump of a tree; the ghost is in the stump, from 
the point of view of the man in the dark, but the 
sump is never in the ghost. Similarly the universe 
i -cper-imposed on the Lord, seen in His piace 
ticouwh Maya, but He is not in it. The Lord 
returns to the same teaching in Chap. IX. 4. 5. | 


Lal oS A CASO, Cr 
तराभरुशशसयसावरास: सवामद ATT M 
मोहित नाभिजानाति मामेभ्यः परमव्ययम्‌ ॥१३॥ 
Vile, 13. 

एमि: By these त्रिभिः three शुणमयः composed of 
Gunas भावे: states मोहितं deluded gë this aq all 
जगत्‌ world एभ्यः from them परं distinct gexa im- 
mutable qf me q not अभिजानाति knows. 

Deluded by these states, the modifications 


11-15] —WITH REALISATION 151 


of the three Gunas (of Prakriti), all this 
world does not know Me, beyond them, and 
immutable. 


देवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया | 
मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तर्रन्ति ते ॥१४॥ 
, VIL 14. 

हि Verily एषा this शुणमयी constituted of Gunas 
Sf divine मम my माया illusion दुरत्यया difficult to 
cross over ये who माम्‌ एव me only प्रपद्यन्ते take 
refuge (in) ते they waft this मायां illusion तरान्त get 
across. 

Verily, this divine illusion of Mine, consti- 
tuted of the Gunas, is difficult to cross over; 
those who devote themselves to Me alone, 
cross over this illusion. 

[ Divine: transcending human perception. 

Devote... alone: Abandoning all formal relig- 


ion (Dharma) completely take refuge in Me, their 
own Self, the Lord of Illusion. | 


न मां दुष्कतिनोसूढाः प्रपद्यन्ते नराधमाः N 
माययापहृतज्ञाना आसुरं भावमाश्रिताः ॥१५॥ 
VIL 15. 

दुष्कृतिनः ९४11-40९75 मूढाः the deluded नराधमाः the 
lowest of men मायया by Maya अपहतज्ञाना: deprived 
of discrimination आसुर belonging to Asura भाव way 
आश्रिताः those who have followed माँ me न not 
प्रपद्यन्ते devote themselves. 

They do not devote themselves to Me,—the 
evil-doers, the deluded, the lowest of men, 
deprived of discrimination by Maya, and 
following the way of Asuras, 


152  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap.7 


- Way of Asuras, i. e, cruelty, untruth, and the 
like. ^ 
C^ ^ + , Le P री. 
चतावथा भजन्त मा जना: खुछातनाञ्ञजुन n 
ua जिज्ञासुरथोर्थ ^e e 
आतां जिज्ञासुरयोथीं ज्ञानी च भरतषभ ॥१६॥ 
VIL 16. 

भरतषभ O bull among the Bharatas अ्रज्ञुन 0 Arjuna 
चतुर्विधाः four kinds सुक्ृतिन: virtuous war: people 
ग्रार्तः the distressed जिज्ञाखुः the seeker for knowl- 
edge wart the seeker for enjoyment ऋ and 
ज्ञानी the wise मां me भजन्ते worship. 

Four kinds of virtuous men worship Me, O 
Ariuna,—the distressed, the seeker for knowl- 
edge, the seeker for enjoyment, and the wise, 
© bull among the Bháratas. 

. Seeker for enjoyment: One who wishes for ob- 
jects of enjoyment, both here and hereafter. 


The Wise: One who has forsaken all desires, 
knowing them to arise from Maya. | 


तेषां ज्ञानी नित्ययुक्त एक्भक्तिर्विशिष्यते ॥ 
fs SE 5 ~ > ky + ~ 
प्रिया Te ज्ञाननाऽययमह स च मम प्रय:॥ १७) 
VIL. 17. 
तेषां Of them नित्ययुक्तः ever-steadfast एकमात्तिः 
whose devotion is to the One ज्ञानी the wise विशिष्यते 
excels हि verily अहम्‌ I giq: of the wise अव्यर्थ 
supremely प्रियः dear q: he च and मम my प्रियः dear. 
Of them, the wise man, ever-steadfast, (and 
fired ) with devotion to the One, excels; for 


supremely dear am I to the wise, and he is 
dear to Me, 


* 


उदाराः Wd एवेते ज्ञानी त्वात्मेव मे मतम्‌ ॥ 


४९-20] . SEVENTH CHAPTER . 193. 


आस्थितः स हि युक्तात्मा मामेवानुत्तमां गतिम्‌ १८ 
MIL. 18. 
एते These qd all एव surely उदाराः noble g but 
ज्ञानी the wise आत्मा Self एव very मे my मते. convic- 
tion f& verily युक्तात्मा steadfast-minded स: he 
अनुत्तमां the supreme गति goal at me एव verily 
ग्रास्यितः is established. 
Noble indeed are they all, but the wise man 
I regard as my very Self ; for with the mind 
steadfast, he is established in Me alone, as the 
supreme goal. 


बहूनां जन्मनामन्ते ज्ञानवान्मां प्रपद्यते ॥ 
वासुदेवः सवेमिति स महात्मा TIAA: IEN 
VII. 19. 

वहूनां Of many जन्मनां of births sre at the end 
ज्ञानवान the wise af me वासुदेव: Vasudeva aq all 
इति thus प्रपद्यते resorts सः that महात्मा the great soul 
सुदुर्लभः very rare. 

At the end of many births, the man of wis- 
dom takes refuge in Me, realising that all this 


is Vàsudeva, (the innermost Self ). Very rare 15 
that great soul, 


कामेस्तेस्तेहेतज्ञानाः प्रपद्यन्तेऽन्यदेवताः॥ 
d तं नियममास्थाय प्रकृत्या नियताः खया ॥२०॥ 
VII. 20. 

WW: By this or that ara: (by) desires हृतज्ञानाः 
those deprived of discrimination तंतं this or that 
नियमं rite आस्थाय having followed स्वया प्रकृत्या by 
their own nature नियताः led अन्यदेवताः other gods 
प्रपद्यन्ते worship. 


154 THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE— [ Chap. 7. 


Others again, deprived of discrimination by 
this and that desire, following this or that rite, 
devote themselves to other gods, led by their 
own natures. 


[ Own natures: Samskáras acquired in previous 
lives. ] : 
यो यो यां यां aa भक्त: अ्रद्धयाचितुमिच्छति ॥ 
तस्य तस्याचलां श्रद्धां तामेव विदधाम्यहम्‌ ॥२१॥ 

VIL. ४1: 

यः यः Whatever wp: devotee af af whatsoever 
aa form sgar with Shraddha afrq to worship 
इच्छति desires तस्य तस्य of him ara that एव surely 
agi Shraddha sr& 1 अचला unflinching विदधामि 
make. 

Whatever a devotee seeks to worship with 
Shraddha, what form soever that Shraddha 
of his—that do I make unwavering. 


स तया श्रद्धया युक्तस्तस्यारा'बनमीहते ॥ 


लभते च ततः कामान्मयेव विहितान्हि तान्‌ ॥२९॥ 
VII. 22. 

सः He तया with that sga (by) Shraddha sw: 
endued तस्य of it आराधनं worship इहते engages in *T 
and ततत: from that qaq by me एव surely विदितान dis- 
pensed ara those qrara. desires हि verily लभते gains. 

Endued with that Shraddbá, he engages 
in the worship of that, and from it, gains 
his desires,—those being verily dispensed by 
Me alone, 


अन्तवत्तु फलं तेषां तहुवत्यव्पमेधसाम ॥ 
देवान्देवयजो यान्ति मद्धक्ता यान्ति मामपि ॥२३॥ 


- 


20-25] ~ WITH REALISATION 155 


VII. 23. 

तु But गल्पमेचसां तेषां of those of little understand- 
ing तत्त that फले fruit अन्तवच limited भवाति becomes 
देवयजः the worshippers of Devas देवान Devas यान्ति 
go मद्धक्ताः my devotees मांस me sig too यान्त 
attain. 

But the fruit, ( accruing) to these men of 
little understanding is limited. The worship- 
pers of Devas go to the Devas; My devotees 
too come to Me. 

* These men of little understanding : Though the 
amount of exertion is the same (in the two kinds 


of worship), these people do not take refuge in Me, 
so that they may attain infinite results. | 


अव्यक्तं व्यक्तिमापन्नं मन्यन्ते मामबुद्धयः ॥ 
परं भावमजानन्तो ममाव्ययमचुत्तमम्‌ ॥२४॥ 
NII, 24- 

अबुद्धयः The foolish मम my अब्यय immutable 
अनुत्तम unsurpassed प्रे supreme भावे nature अजानन्तः 
not knowing अव्यक्ते the unmanifested af me व्यक्ति 
manifestation srq come मन्यन्ते regard. 

The foolish regard Me as (only) the un- 
manifested come into manifestation, not 
knowing My supreme state,—the Immutable 
and transcendental. 

i The ignorant take Me as an ordinary mortal, 
assumigg embodiment from the unmanifested state, 
like all other men, being impelled by the force ot 
past Karma. This is due to their ignorance of My 


real nature, hence they do not worship the One 
without a second. | 


नाहं प्रकाशः PACT APMATATAATTT: ॥ 
: à 


THE WAY OF KNOWLEDGE— [ Chap. 7, 


Se £x 


मूडो5य नाभिजानाति लोको मामजमव्ययम॥२५॥ 
VIL 25. 
अहं 2 योगमायासमावृतः veiled by Yoga-Maya i. e., 
:.usion born of Yoga or the union of three Gunas 
सर्वस्य to al! प्रकाश: manifest मूढ: the deluded ग्रयं this 
नाकः word gà the unborn अब्यय the immutable 
मां me ने not अभिजानाति knows. 
Veited by the illusion born of the congress 
the Gunas, I am not manifest to all. This 


Ce.uded world knows Me not, the Unborn, the 
iinutab.e 


वेदाहं समतीतानि वर्तमानानि चार्जुन N 


क os ex 9 ~ 

भावष्याण च भूतान मां तु वेद न कश्चन ॥२६॥ 
VII. 26. 
^ * fat ~ © ~ 

Baa O Arjuna समतीतानि the pasty and वर्तमानानि 
tne present भविष्याण the future च and भूतानि beings 
KF 1 Ja kavy तु but मा me कश्चन any one q not वेद 
Ke 

I snow, O Arjuna, the beings of the whole 
Past, anc the present, and the future, but Me 
none knoweth, 

Thi F-gu-mdyd spread over the Lord, which 
cns wie understanding of others in recognising 
iim. does nct obscure His own knowledge, as it 
= Hisani He is the wielder of it,—just as the 
* टणक ne S yess i c - 1 1 

uroa Mava caused by a juggler ( Mzyavin ) 
woes LI! obstruct his own knowledge. This illusion 
Paia oinas others, cannot dim His vision. | 


इच्छाद्वेपससुत्येन zem ES भारत ॥ 
सवभूतानि संमोह Tesi परन्तप॥२७॥ 
ere Wa 


L ia, " 


ur 


25-29] —WITH REALISATION Lot 


VIL. 3327. 

परन्तप O Scorcher of foes भारत O descendant of 
Bharat सर्गे at birth इच्छांद्रेषसमुत्यथेन arisen from desire 
and aversion gegürz« by the delusion of the pairs 
of opposites सर्वभूतानि all beings संमोहं delusion 
यान्ति go. 

By the delusion of the pairs of opposites, 
arising from desire and aversion, O descend- 
ant of Bharata, all beings fallinto delusion at 
birth, O scorcher of foes, 


[ To one whose mind is subject to the dualistic 
delusion, caused by the passions of desire and 
aversion, there cannot indeed arise a knowledge of 
things as they are, even of the external world; far 
less can such an intellect grasp the transcendental 
knowledge of the innermost Self. ] 


येषां त्वन्तगतं पापं जनानां पुणयकमण्ाम्‌ di 
ते इन्द्रमोहनिमुक्ता भजन्ते मां इढत्रताः ॥२८॥ 
VII. 28. 

तु But पुशयकर्मणा of men of virtuous deeds येषां 
whose जनाना of men पापं sin अन्तगतं is at an end geg- 
मोहनिमुक्ताः freed from the delusion of the pairs of 
opposites ते they zesmr men of firm resolve af 
me भजन्ते worship. 

Those men of virtuous deeds, whose sin has 
come to an end,—they freed from the delusion 
of the pairs of opposites, worship Me with 
firm resolve. 
जरामरणामोक्षाय मार्माश्रत्य यतन्ति ये ॥ 
ते AM तद्विदुः HAA कमे चाखिलम्‌ ॥२६॥ 

VII. 29. 
जरामरणमोक्षाय For freedom from old age and 


- 


1255 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap, 7. 


death afin me आशित्य having taken refuge ये who 
we strive ते they तत्‌ that ब्रह्म Brahman Haeq the 
whe अध्यात्म Adhyatma आखिल the entire कमं 
Karma @ and fgg: know. 
Those who strive for freedom from old age 
and death, taking refuge in Me,—they know 
Brahman, the whole of Adhyátma, and Karma 
In its entirety. 
Fier irae} the whole of Adhydtma: They 
i the Reality underlying the innermost 


zm ie f 
Tei 5 | im ru 
f ^ 


oof -> EN e 
va hub जर Gat, 


साधिभूताधिदेवं मां साधियज्ञं च ये विदुः ॥ 
प्रयाणकालेऽपि च मां ते विदुथुक्तचेतस्रः ॥३०॥ 
Y IL. 35. 

य Who wand af me साविभूतं साधिदेवं साधियज्ञं च 

i Adnionuta, Adhidaiva, and Adhiyajna faz: know 
में :..८४ युक्तचेतसः steadfast in mind प्रयागकाले at the 
Vine Gf deatn आपि even af me विद्‌: know 

4 1058 who know Me with the Adhibhuta 
ars the Achidaiva, and with the Adhiyajna, 
‘c tinue to, know Me even at the time of 
परळ, steadfast in mind. 


_+egir consciousness of Me continues as ever 
unitected bv the change of approaching death. | 


इति ज्ञानविज्ञानयोगो नाम ससमो ऽध्यायः | 
The end of the seventh chapter designated 
Wat OF KNOWLEDGE WITH REALISA- 


pm E ; 
" 


TION, 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita, 


l| अष्टमो ऽध्यायः ॥ 
EIGHTH CHAPTER 


अजुन उवाच ॥ 
कि aga किमध्यात्मं कि कमे पुरुषोत्तम ॥ 
अधिभूतं च कि परोक्तमभ्रिदैवं किमुच्यते ॥१॥ 
MIT dE 

अजन: Arjuna उवाच said : 

पुरुषोत्तम O best of Purushas तत that say Brah- 
man fa what आध्यात्मं Adhyatma fay what कर्म Karma 
(च and) fa what अधिमते Adhibhuta कि what gre 
called कि what च and ग्रधिदेव Adhidaiva उच्यते is said. 

Arjuna said : 

What is that Brahman, what is Adhyatma, 
what is Karma, O best of Purushas? What is 
called Adhibhuta, and what Adhidaiva? 


अधियज्ञः कर्थं कोऽत्र देहेऽस्मिन्‌ मधुसूदन N 


प्रयाणकाले च कथं क्षेयो सि नियतात्माभिः ॥२॥ 
हे VIII. 2. 
मधुसूदन O destroyer of Madhu spy here आस्मत 
in this dg body कः who कथे how ग्राथियज्ञः 
Adhiyajna = and प्रयाणकाले at the time of death 
नियता त्मानि: by the self-controlled ay how grat: know- 
able असि art. 


150 THE WAY TO THE— [ Chap. 8. 


ied who in what way is Adhiyajna here 
is this body, O destroyer of Madhu? And how 
art Thou known at the time of death, by tl 
seit-controlied? 


श्रीसगवाचुवाच ॥ 
अक्षरं ब्रह्म परमं स्वभावोऽध्यात्ममुच्यते ॥ 
भूतभावोद्भवकरो विसगेः mean: ॥३॥ 
VII. 3. 
श्रीभगवात The Blessed Lord उवाच said : 
zt The Imperishable परम Supreme saf Brah- 


नो. 5 individual body अध्यात्म Adhydtma उच्यते 
is sold भूतभावोद्धवकरः that w hich causes the exist- 
ence and genesis of beings विसर्गः offering (to gods) 
कर्मसंज्ञित is called Karma. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

The Imperishable is the Supreme Brah- 
tian. Its dwelling in each individual body, 
called Adhyatma; the offering in sacrifice 
which causes enesis and support of beings, 
is cailed Karma, 

. OFering in sacrifice—includes here all virtuous 
>. 

Aarma: Ch MI. 14. 15.) 


अधिभूतं क्षरो भावः पुरुषञ्चाचिदेचतस्‌ ॥ 
अःअयज्ञोऽहमवात्र देहे देहभृतां चर ॥७॥ 
VII. 4 


exuat Of the embodied qe the best क्षरः perish- 
à..; नावः existence sad Adhibhuta पुरुषः In- 


2-6 ] —IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN 161 


‘dweller अधिदेवत॑ Adhidaivata अत्र here देहे in the 
body sr I एव verily ग्रधियज्ञः Adhiyajna. 

The perishable adjunct is the Adhibhuta, 
and the Indweller ts the Adhidaivata ; I alone 
am the Adhiyajna here in this body, O best 
of the embodied. | 


[ AdhibÀula: that perishable adjunct which is 
different from, and yet depends for its existence on 
the self-conscious principle, i. e., everything material, 
everything that has birth. 


AdAidaizaía: the universal Self in Its subtle 
aspect: the Centre from which all living beings 
have their sense-power. 

Adhiyajna; the presiding deity of sacrifice, — 
Vishnu. ] 


अन्तकाले च AWA स्मरन्मुकत्वा कलेवरम्‌ |i 
य: प्रयाति स agra याति नास्त्यत्र संशय: dÓYdl 
VIII. 5, 

sy And अन्तकाले at the time of death माम्‌ me एव 
only स्मरत remembering कलेवर body मुक्त्वा leaving यः 
who प्रयाते goes forth सः he agra my being याति 
attains अत्र here संशयः doubt न not आस्त is. | 

And he, who at the time of death, medita- 
ting on Me alone, goes forth, leaving the body, 
attains My Being : there is no doubt of this, 


यं यं वापि स्मरन्भावं त्यजत्यन्ते कलेवरम्‌ ॥ 
d तमेवैति कोन्तेय सदा तङ्गाचभावितः ॥६॥ 
VIIT, 6. 


अन्ते At the end ये य॑ whatever wr4 idea (object) 
धा or आपि even स्मरत remembering कलेवर body 
gard leaves कोन्तेय O'son of Kunti सदा constantly 


- 


6-10 ] EIGHTH CHAPTER 163 


mind made ) steadfast by the method of habitual 
meditation नान्यगामिना not moving towards any other 
thing चेतसा with mind परमं supreme [दिव्यं resplend- 
ent geq Purusha ग्रनुचिन्तयन्‌ meditating याति goes, 

With the mind, not moving towards any- 
thing else, made steadfast by the method of 
habitual meditation, and dwelling in the 
Supreme, Resplendent Purusha, O son of 
Prithá, one goes to Him, 

| Mezhod-.—Y oga. 


Resplendent —the Being in the solar orb, same as 
Adhidaivata, of the fourth sloka. 


कवि पुराणमनुशासितार- 
मणोरणीयांसमजुस्मरेय: ॥ 
सवस्य धातारमाचिन्त्यरूप- 
मादिव्यवणशे तमसः परस्तात्‌ ॥६॥ 
प्रयाणकाले मनसाऽचलेन 
~ ~ ^ 
भक्त्या युक्तो योगवलेन चेव ॥ 
भ्रवोमेध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक्‌ 
* ® A 
स तं परं पुरुषमुर्पात दिव्यम्‌ ॥१०॥ 
VII. 9, ro. 
कविं Omniscient पुराणं ancient अनुणासितारं over- 
ruler अणोः than atom ग्राणियांसं minuter सर्वस्य of 
all धातारं sustainer ग्रांचन्त्यरपे one whose form is 
inconceivable आदित्यवर्ण selí-luminouslike the sun 
तमसः of the darkness ( of ignorance) qara beyond 
प्रयाणकाले at the time of death wear with devotion 
युक्त: endued अचलेन unmoving मनसा with mind 
योगवलेन with the power of Yoga च and एव verily 
भ्रवोः of the two eye-brows मध्ये betwixt प्राण Prana 


4] 


164 THE WAY TO THE— [ Chap. 8. 


सम्यक thoroughly आवेश्य placing q: who अनुस्मरत 
remembers सः he q that परं supreme दिव्यं resplend- 
ent पुरुष Purusha उपेति reaches. 

The Omniscient, the Ancient, the Over- 
ruler, minuter than an atom, the Sustainer of 
all, of form inconceivable, self-luminous like 
the sun, and beyond the darkness of Maya— 
he, who meditates on Him thus, at the time 
of death, full of devotion, with the mind un- 
moving, and also by the power of Yoga, fixing 
the whole Prana betwixt the eye-brows, he 
goes to that Supreme, Resplendent Purusha. 

[ Self-luminous: Known by no agency like the 
understanding, or the mind or the senses, but by Self 
alone. 


Power of Yoga—which comes, by the constant 
practice of Samadhi. 

Prana: the vital current. 

fixing the whole Prána—means, concentrating 
the whole will and selt-consciousness. | 


यदच्षरं वेदविदो बदन्ति 

विशन्ति यद्यतयों वीतरागा: ॥ 
यदिच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचय चरन्ति 

तत्ते पदं संग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्ये ॥११॥ 

VII. 11. 
वेदाविदः Knowers of the Veda ga which अक्षरं 

imperishable qafeq speak वीतरागाः freed from attach- 
ment यत्तयः self-controlled ( Sannyasins)' qa which 
Aafa enter यत which इच्छन्तः desiring ब्रह्मचर्य 
Brahmacharya चरान्त practise ते to thee तत्‌ that पदं 


state to be obtained सुंम्रहश in brief प्रवक्ष्ये (1) shall 
tell. 


10-13 |] | —IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN 165 


What the knowers of the Veda speak of as 
imperishable, what the self-controlled ( San- 
nyasins ), freed’ from attachment enter, to gain 
which goal, they live the life of a Brahma- 
charin, that I shall declare unto thee in brief. 

| Brahmachárim—a religious student who takes 
the vow of continence etc.; every moment of this 


stage is one of hard discipline and asceticism. ] 
Cf. Kathopanishad. Il. 14. 


सर्वेद्वाराशि संयम्य मनो हृदि निर्ट्य च ॥ 
मूध्न्याधायात्मनः प्राणमास्थितो योगधारणाम्‌ १२ 
3“मिल्येकाक्षरं ब्रह्म व्याहरन्मामजुस्मरन्‌ || 


ev - € [dms + e. 
यः प्रयात त्यजन्देह स यात परमा गातम्‌॥१३॥ 
MES wd22 Ta 

सर्वद्वाराणि All inlets (senses) संयभ्य having con- 
trolled मनः mind हृदि in heart निरुद्धथ having confined 
- and प्राणं Prana मूर्ध्नि in the head आधाय having 
placed आत्मनः of one's self योगधारणा practice of 
concentration 'ग्रास्थितः established (in)e* Om इति 
this mare one-syllable ब्रह्म Brahman sga 
uttering मां me अनुस्मरन remembering wg body 
asa leaving q; who प्रयाति departs सः he परमा 
supreme गति goal याति goes. 

Controlling all the senses, confining the mind 
in the heart, drawing the Prana into the head, 
occupied in the practice of concentration, 
uttering the one-syllable * Om"— the Brah- 
man, and meditating on Me ;—he who departs, 
leaving the body, attains the Supreme goal, 

[ Supreme goal: the lower Brahman is meant 
here, not the Absolute, for, at death, according ta 

12 ० 


168 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 8. 


the Sruti, the Pranas of him who passes to the 
Absolute, do not depart; being Brahman he goes to 
Brahman. No movement can be predicated of him, 
because he has already become the Infinite. ( Dri. 
Up. IV. 4 and 5.).| 


—Cf. Vedanta Sutras, Ch. IV. Pt. II. zz to 14. 
अनन्यचेताः सततं यो मां स्मरति [Wem ॥ 


+ OSEE aN — m 
तस्याह सुलभ: पाथ [नत्ययुक्तस्य यागनः NE 2il 
NATL. IA. 

अनभन्यचेताः With the mind not thinking of any 
other object यः who माँ me fàgar: daily सतर्तं cons- 
tantly स्मरति remembers apy O son of Pritha अहं I 
तस्य नित्ययुक्तत्य of that ever-steadfast योशिन: of the 
Yogi सुलभ: easily attainable, 

I am easily attainable by that ever-stead- 
fast Yogin who remembers Me constantly and 
daily, with a single mind, O son of Pritha. 

[ Datly—all through life. | 


सासुपेत्य पुनजेन्म दुःखालयसशाश्वतम di 
नाझवन्ति महात्मानः SACS परमां गता: ॥१९॥ 
VIIL 15. 

परमा Highest संसिद्धि perfection mat: reaching 
महात्मानः the great-souled ones Af me उपे having 
attained दुःखालयं home of pain अशाश्वतं ephemera! 
(च and) पुनर्जन्म re-birth st not आमतरन्ति get. 

Reaching the highest perfection,and having 
attained Me, the great-souled ones, are nc 
more subject to re-birth—the home of pain 
and ephemeral. 


| Ephemeral: non-eternal, of an ever-changing 
nature. | 


Lal 


13-18 | EIGHTH CHAPTER 167 


आत्रह्ममुवनालोकाः पुनरावर्तिनो$जन ॥ 
मामुपेत्य तु कोन्तेय पुनजेन्म न विद्यते ॥१६॥ 
VIII. 16. 

अर्जुन O Arjuna आन्रह्मसुवनात्‌ up to (i. e. includ- 
ing ) the realm of Brahma लोकाः worlds पुनरावर्तिन: 
subject to return g but कोन्तेय 0 Kounteya qt me 
उपेत्य having attained yqq re-birth न not विद्यते is. 

All the worlds, O Arjuna, including the 
realm of Brahma, are subject to return, but 
after attaining Me, O son of Kunti, there is 
no re-birth. 

[ Subject fo refurn—because limited by time. ] 


सहस्रयुगपयन्तमहर्यह्ह्मशो विदुः N 
रात्रि युगसहस्थान्तां तेऽहोरात्रविदो जनाः ॥१७॥ 
VIEL. ‘1%; 
सहस्रयुगपर्यन्तं Ending in thousand Yugas ब्रह्मणः of 
Brahma यत्‌ which अहः day युगसहतस्त्रान्ता ending in 
thousand ४०४०५ राचे night (4 who) faz: know ते those 
जना: men अहोरात्रविदः knowers of day and night. 
They know ( the true measure of ) day and 
night, who know the day of Brahma, which 
ends in a thousand Yugas, and the night 
which (also) endsinathousand Yugas. 


[ Day and night—mean evolution and involution 
of the whole universe respectively. | 


अव्यकाड्यक्तय: सवा: प्रभवन्त्यहरागमे ॥ 


~ ~ a 0 à SN 
राज्यागम प्रलोयन्ते तत्रवाव्यक्तसशके dell 
VIII. 186. 
अहरागमे At the approach of day अ्रव्यक्तात्‌ from 
the unmanifested सवाः all च्यक्तयः manifestations 


18-22]  —IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN 169 


नश्यत्खु at (their) destruction न not बिनश्याति dies. 

But beyond this unmanifested, there 1s that 
other Unmanifested, Eternal Existence— 
That which is not destroyed at the destruc- 
tion of all beings. 


[ This Unmanifested—which being the seed of 
the manifested, is Avidyà itself. ] 


अव्यक्तोऽक्षर इत्युक्तस्तमाहुः परमां गतिम्‌ N 
यं प्राप्य न निवतेन्ते तद्धाम परमं मम ॥२१॥ 
VIII. 21. 

spen: Unmanifested sp Imperishable इति 
thus उक्त: called तम्‌ that परमा supreme गतिम्‌ goal 
arg: they describe यम which प्राप्य having attained 
न not निवर्तन्ते they return तत्‌ that मम my परमम्‌ 
highest धाम state. 

What has been called Unmanifested and 
Imperishable, has been described as the Goal 
Supreme, That is My highest state, having 
attained which, there is no return. 
पुरुषः स परः पार्थ भक्तया लभ्यस्त्वनन्यया ॥ 
यस्यान्तःस्थानि भूतानि येन सवमिदं ततम ॥२२॥ 

VIII. 22. 

पार्थ O son of Prithà भूत्तानि Beings यस्य of whom 
अन्त.स्थानि dwelling in यन by whom gè this सर्वे व] 
तते pervaded तु also स्तः that परः Supreme yey: 
Purusha अनन्यया by whole-souled wear by devotion 
लभ्यः is obtainable. 

And that Supreme Purusha is attainable, 
O son of Prithá, by whole-souled devotion to 
Him alone, in Whom all beings dwell, and by 
Whom all this is pervaded, 


23-25] EIGHTH CHAPTER 171 


Smoke, night-time, the dark fortnight, the 
six months of the Southern passage of the 
Sun—taking this path the Yogi, attaining the 
Junar light, returns. 


[ It is difficult to decide the true significance of 
these two verses (24 & 25). Some are inclined to 
think that each of the steps means a sphere; while 
others, a state of consciousness. Still others think, 
that the series beginning with fire means develop- 
ing states of illumination and renunciation, and 
that beginning with smoke, increasing states of 
ignorance and attachment. 


The two paths, Devay&na and Pitriyána, by which 
the souls of the dead are supposed to travel to the 
other world of their deserts are mentioned in the 
Upanishads, prominently in the Chhandogya, V. 
X. I, 2. Dadarayana discusses these passages in 
the Brahma Sutras, IV. ii. 18—21. But an interest- 
ing light has been thrown upon the question by Mr. 
Tilak's theory of the Arctic home of the ancestors 
of the Aryan race. He has also dealt with this 
subject specially, in a paper of great value 
which appeared in Prabuddha Bharata (Vol. IX. 
p.160.) Considering the importance of the doc- 
trine and the excellent way in which it has been 
elucidated by Mr. Vilak, we shall briefly note below 
the main heads of his argument. 


The words Pitriyana and Devayána are used many 
times in the Rigveda, But the distinction made in 
the Upanishads about the soul’s path, according as 
aman died during the dark or the bright half of the 
year was unknown to the bards of the Rigveda, who 
held the view that the soul of a man always 
travelled by the Pitriy4na road, whatever be the 
time of his death. Jt is therefore clear that the 
doctrine of the Upanishads was a later development, 
probably evolved after physical light and darkness 
had come to be connected with moral good and 
evil and the dual character of the world was 


172 THE WAY TO THE— [ Chap. 8. 


established. Now, if along with this we consider 
that death during the Southern passage of the sun 
was regarded as inauspicious from the Arctic times, 
we can see how the distinction arose between the 
paths of a man’s soul according as he died in the 
dark or the bright part of the year. 


As to the series of steps in each path, since 
Agni was believed to be the only leader of the sou! 
on its path, and both paths ended with the passages 
of the sun, the starting and halting points thus 
settled, it was not difficult to fill in the intermediate 
steps. The dual character of the world is mani- 
fested in Agni as flame and smoke. The flame 
was therefore the starting point of one path and 
smoke of the other. Day and night, increasing 
and decreasing moon, Northern and Southern 
passages of the sun came next in natural order. 
The number of steps can easily be increased, and 
as a matter of fact has been increased in the 
Kaushitaki and some other Upanishads, on the 
same general principle. 


Another point in this connection may be noted. 
There is nothing in the second or Pitriyana path to 
correspond with Agni, in the first. We must there- 
fore either reduce the number of steps in the first 
path by taking the words “fire” and “flame” in 
appositional relaüon and translate the same as 
“fire, that is flame," or increase the steps in the 
second by adding “fire” as one. 


शुक्ककष्शे गती ह्येते जगतः शाश्वते मते ॥ 
एकया यात्यनाइत्तिमन्ययावतेते पुनः ॥२६॥ 
VIE. 26. 
हि Verily जगतः of the world zrggnsaür bright and 
dark एते these गती two paths शाश्वते eternal मृते are 


considered एकया by one अनावृत्तिम्‌ non-return याति 
goes to ग्रन्यया by the other पुनः again आवतते returns. 


Truly are these bright and dark paths of 


25-28]  —IMPERISHABLE BRAHMAN 173 


the world considered eternal: one leads to 
non-return ; by the other, one returns. 


[The paths are eternal, because Samsâra is eternal.] 


नंते खती पाथ जानन्‌ योगी gafa कञ्चन ॥ 
तस्मात्सर्वेषु कलेषु योगयुक्तो भवाज्जुन ॥२७॥ 
MITT 27. 

पार्थं O son of Prithà एते these सती two paths 
जानन्‌ knowing कश्चन whosoever योगी Yogi न sara 
is not deluded तस्मात therefore अज्ञुन O Arjuna 
सर्वेषु in all gram times योगयुक्तः steadfast in Yoga 
भव be (thou.) 

No Yogi, O son of Pritha, is deluded after 
knowing these paths. Therefore, O Arjuna, 
be thou steadfast in Yoga, at all times. 

| Knowing that one of the paths leads to Samsara 


and the other to Moksha, the Yogi takes up the one 
leading to illumination and rejects the other. ] 


~ ~ A 

वेदेषु यज्ञेषु तपःसु चेव 
दानेषु यत्पुण्यफलं प्रदिष्टम्‌ N 
- £^. $e e e orn 
अत्येति तत्सवमिदं विदित्वा 
M OA > An 
योगी परं स्थानसुपात चाद्यम्‌ ॥२८॥ 
VIII. 28. 

Fèy In the (study of the) Vedas यज्ञेषु in the 
(practice of) Yajnas qq: in the (practice of) 
austerities दानेषु in (giving) gifts एव also यल what- 
ever पुरायफलं meritorious effect प्रादिशम is declared च 
and इदम्‌ this विदित्वा having known योगी a Yogi 
तत्‌ itur all àf rises above आद्ये primeval परं 
supreme स्थानं abode उपेति goes to. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ नवमी प्ध्यायः ॥ 
NINTH CHAPTER 


श्रीभगवानुवाच N 
इदं तु ते शुह्यतमं प्रवक्ष्यास्यनसूयचे N 
ज्ञानं विज्ञानसहितं यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेष्शुभात्‌ NRN 
ix या. 

श्रीमगवास The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

इदं ‘This सुष्यतमस्‌ most profound g indeed विज्ञान 
realisation सहित united with ज्ञानं knowledge saaga 
to one who does not carp to thee ग्रवश्च्यांमि shall 
declare arg which great having known ayra. from 
evil (Samsara ) Arsa (thou) shalt be free. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

To thee, who doth not carp, verily shall I 
now declare this, the most profound knowl- 
edge, united with realisation, having known 
which, thou shalt be free from evil ( Samsara), 


राजाविद्या UAT पविज्रमिदसुत्तमम N 
पत्यक्षालगर्म अस्ये सुसुखं कतुमव्ययम्‌ ॥२॥ 
LXX 
इदभ्‌ This रातिना the king of sciences, (i. e., the 
highest science ) णमु kingly secret ( i. ७., the 
deepest of all profound truths ) उत्तम supreme TAAT 


176 THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE— [ Chap. 9. 


purifier प्रत्यक्षावगमम्‌ realisable by direct perception 
धर्म्य endowed with (immense) merit Rg to perform 
सुसुखं very easy (च and) अव्ययं of imperishable nature. 

Of sciences, the highest ; of profundities, the 
deepest; of purifiers, the supreme, is this; 
realisable by direct perception, endowed with 
(immense ) merit, very easy to perform, and 
of an imperishable nature. 


अभ्रद्दधानाः पुरुषा धमेस्यास्य परन्तप N 
अप्राप्य मां निवतेन्ते मृत्युसंसारवत्माने ॥३॥ 
IX, 54. 

परन्तप O scorcher of foes geq of this धर्मस्य of 
Dharma srsrgqrar: without Shraddha पुराः persons 
मां me अ्रप्राप्य without attaining मृत्यु death संसार 
rebirth qeqf«q in the path (मृत्युसंसारवत्मेनि in the path 
of rebirth fraught with death ) निवतन्ते they return. 

Persons without Shraddhá for this Dharma, 
return, O scorcher of foes, without attaining 
Me, to the path of re-birth fraught with 
death. 


| IWuAeouf...... Dharma: Who have no faith in 
this knowledge of the Self, regarding the physical 
body itself as the Self. | 


मया ततमिदं सवे जगदव्यक्तथूर्तिना ॥ 
मत्स्थानि सवेभूतानि न चाहं तेष्ववस्थितः ॥७॥ 
IN. 4. 

अच्यक्त Unmanifested मूर्तिना by (the) form मया by 
me g&this सर्वे all जगत world qq pervaded सर्व- 
सूतानि all beings मत्स्थानि exist in me अदे 1 च and तेषु 
in them ने not zrafegqa: dwelling. 

All this world is pervaded by Me in My 


m 


178 | SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [Chap.9. 


As the mighty wind, moving always every- 
where, rests ever in the Akásha, know thou, 
that even so do all beings rest in Me. 

| Resis ever in the ARdsha—without being at- 
tached to it. 

The idea is, that beings rest in the Lord with- 
out contact with, and so without producing any 
effect on, Him.] 


सर्वभूतानि कोन्तेय प्रकृति यान्ति मामिकाम्‌ ॥ 


RETA पुनस्तानि कल्पादो विसजाम्यहम ॥७॥ 
LX 7m 

कोन्तेय O son of Kunti सर्वभूतानि all beings 
कल्पक्षये at the end of the Kalpa मामिकां my gare 
Prakriti यान्ति go to पुनः again कल्पादो at the begin- 
ning of the Kalpa तानि them az I Aam send 
forth, 

At the end of a Kalpa, O son of Kunti, all 
beings go back to My Prakriti: at the begin- 
ning of (another ) Kalpa, I send them forth 
again. 

[ Prakriti: The inferior one composed of the 
three Gunas. 

Kalpa—a period of cosmic manifestation. ] 


प्रकृति खामवष्टभ्य विखजामि पुनः पुनः ॥ 
भूतत्राममिमं छत्खमवशं प्रकतेवेशात ॥८॥ 
LO 2B. E 

स्वाम्‌ My own प्रकृति Prakriti गअवष्टन्य havi ng ani- 
mated wa: of Prakriti qure from the sway of हमम 
this geet whole आवश helpless भूतग्रामं multitude of 
beings पुनः पुनः again and again विसृजामि (1) send 
forth, 


6-10 ] NINTH CHAPTER 178. 


Animating My Prakriti, I project again 
and again this whole multitude of bemes, 
helpless under the sway of Prakriti. 

[ Azimaiing My Prakrifé—invigorating and 
fertilising the Prakriti dependent on Him, which 
had gone to sleep at the universal dissolution, at 
the end of the Kalpa. ] 


e e e v. e eo * 
ने HT तान कमाश नंबधान्त चनजय dH 
उदासीनवदासीनमसक्त तेषु mr NEN 
12. 0. 

धनंजय O Dhananjaya तानि these कर्माणि acts तेषु 
cag in those acts भग्रसक्त unattached उदासीनवत्‌ as, 
one neutral or indifferent ग्रासीनं sitting च and af 
me न निबधरान्त (they ) do not bind. 

These acts do not bind Me, sitting asone 
neutral, unattached to them, O Dhananjaya. 

| These acts—which involve the unequal creation 
and dissolution of the universe. 


As in the case of the Ishvara, so of others also, 
the absence of the egotistic feeling of agency, and of 
attachment for results, is the cause of freedom 
(from Dharma and Adharma.) ] 


AISAN प्रकृति: सूयते सचराचरम ॥ 
हेतुनाऽनेन कोन्तेय जगादिपरिवर्तते dell 
IX. 10. 

ग्रध्यक्षेण By reason of proximity (lit. presiding 
over) मया by me प्रकृति: Prakriti सचराचरम the moving 
and the unmoving सूयते produces कौन्तेय O son of 
Kunti अनेन through this हेतुना (by) cause ( g this) 
जगत्‌ world विषरिवतेते wheels round and round. 

By reason of My proximity, Prakriti pro- 
duces all this, the moving and the unmoving ; 


180 THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE— [Chap. 9. 


the world wheels round and round, O son of 
Kunti, because of this. 


“In verses VII to X the Lord defines His 
position, following the Arundhati Nyáva. When a 
bride is brought to her husband's house for the 
first time, he shows her a very tiny star, called 
Arundhati. To do this, he has to direct her gaze 
the right way, which he does by asking her to look 
at sometbing near and something big, in the 
direction of the star, e. g., a branch of a tree. 
Next, he draws her attention to a large bright star 
Observed beyond this branch, and so on, till by. 
several steps, he succeeds in leading her eyes to the 
right thing. This method of leading to a subtle 
object through easy steps, is called, Arundhati 
Naya. The Lord begins by stating that He pro- 
jects all beings at the beginning of evolution: 
Prakriti is only an instrument in His hands. Next, 
He says, He is not affected by that act, since He sits 
by, as one neutral, perfectly unattached. Lastly, He 
leads up to the final truth that really He does 
nothing, it is Prakriti, who animated by His 
proximity produces all that is. It is His Light that 
lights up Prakriti, and makes her live and act, 
That is all the relation between Him and her. ] 


अवजानन्ति मां मूढा मानुषी तज्चमाश्रितस॥ 
परं भावमजानतो मम भूतमहेश्वरस ॥११॥ ° 
IX. 11. 

भूतमहेश्वरं Great Lord of beings मम my परे higher 
भातं state or nature ग्रजानंतः unaware of मूढा: fool 
सानुर्षी human qd body or form आश्रित dwelling ara 
me ग्रवजानन्ति disregard 

Unaware of My higher state, as the great 
Lord of beings, fools disregard Me, dwelling 
in the human form. 

| Great Lord—Supreme Self, ] 


४७-४३) —AND THE KINGLY SECRET 181 


ns x र ha e 
मोघाशा मोघकमाणो मोघज्ञाना विचेतसः ॥ 

m ~ A ~ ~ ex o0 
राक्षसीमाखरी चेव प्रकृति मोहिनी श्रिताः ॥१२॥ 
IN. कटे; 

मोघाशाः Of vain hopes मोघकर्माणः of vain works 
मोघज्ञानाः of vain knowledge विचेतसः senseless 
मोहिनीं delusive treat of the nature of Rikshasas 
न्त्र and ग्रासुरी of the nature of Asuras ygi] nature 
श्रिताः (are) possessed of एव verily. 

Of vain hopes, of vain works, of vain knowl- 
edge, and senseless, they verily are possessed 
of the delusive nature of Rakshasas and 
Asuras. 


| Vain—because they neglect their own Self. 
They see no self beyond the body. 


They—trefers to those described in the pre- 
ceding sloka. 


Rakshasas have Rájasic nature, Asuras, Támasic. ] 


महात्मानस्तु मां पार्थ देवी प्रकतिमाधिता: ॥ 


सजजत्यनन्यमनस्रो ज्ञात्वा भूतादिमव्ययस ॥१३॥ 
IX. 13. 

तु But पार्थं O son of Prithá महात्मानः great-souled 
Ónes दैवी divine qud Prakriti sfat: possessed 
of अनन्यमनसः with a mind devoted to nothing else 
भूतादि origin of beings ग्रब्यये immutable माँ me 
ज्ञात्वा knowing भजन्ति worship. 

But the great-souled ones, O son of Pritha, 
possessed of the Divine Prakriti, knowing Me 
to be the origin of beings, and immutable, 
worship Me with a single mind, 

[ Divine: Sattvic. ] 

13 


IS? SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA Chap. 


सततंकीतयन्तों मां यतन्तश्च wur 


नमस्यंतश्च मां भक्त्या नित्ययुक्ता उपासते ॥१४॥ 
IX. 134. 

aaa Always कीतयन्दः glorifying qf me genar: of 
frm resolve यतन्त striving च and भक्तया with devo- 
ton नमस्यंतः bowing down = and नित्ययुक्ताः always. 
steadfast मां me उपासते they worship. 

Glorifying Me always and striving with frm 
resoive, bowing down to Me in devotion,, 
always steadfast, they worship Me. 
ज्ञानयज्ञेन चाप्यन्ये यजन्तो माझुपासते ॥ 
एकत्वेन पृथक्त्वेन वहुधा विश्वतोमुख ॥१५॥ 

IN. dE 

अन्ये Others आपि too च and ज्ञानयज्ेन with the 
Yajna of knowledge qaseq: sacrificing af me 
उपासते (they) worship एकळत्वेन as one TAFF as 
diferent विश्वतोतुखं the All-Formed बहुधा in various 
wars. 

Others, too, sacrificing by the Yajna of 
Knowledge, (1. e, seeing the Self in all ) wor- 
ship Me the All-Formed, as ODE, as distinct, 
as manifold. 


_-All-Fermed: He who has assumed all the mani- 
fold forms in the universe. 

ds cn—identitying himself with the All-Formed ; 
—the Advaita view. 

-is distinci—making a distinction in essence 
between the Lord and himself ;—ihe Dualistic view. 

s mauif2ld—as the various divinities, Brahma, 
Rudra &c. 7 


अहं क्रतुरहं यज्ञः खधाहमहमौषधस ॥ 
संत्रोऽमहमेवाज्यमहमञ्चिरहम्‌ EW ॥१६॥ 


४4-18 | NINTH CHAPTER 183 


OD 
C2 


IX. 16. 

अहे 1 ऋतुः the Kratu sz I यज्ञ: the Yajna g I 
स्वधा the Svadhá अहं I atg the Aushadham wë I 
मन्त्र: the Mantra yz I आज्यस the Ajyam gq also 
sre I आग्नि the fire अहे I gqa the oblation. 

I am the Kratu, I the Yajna, I the 
Svadhâ, I the Aushadham, I the Mantra, I 
the Ajyam, I the fire, and I the oblation. 

| Krafu is a particular Vedic rite. 

Fajna: The worship enjoined in the Smriti. 

Svadhád : food offered to manes ( Pitris). 

Aushadham: all vegetable food and medicinal 
herbs. 

Afanira: the chant with which oblation is offered. 


Ajyam : articles of oblation. 
The fire—into which the offering is poured. | 


पिताइमस्य जगतो माता धाता पितामह:॥ 
Yt पवित्रमोंकार WH साम यजुरेव च ॥१७॥ 
>. are 

xyz I अस्य this जगतः of the world पिता father 
माला mother धाता the sustainer पितामह: the grand- 
father वेद the one thing to be known पेत्र the 
purifier ओकारः the syllable ‘Om’ sæ the Rik 
dry Sáman ag: Yajus एव also च and. 

I am the Father of this world, the Mother, 
the Sustainer, the Grandfather; the Purifier, 
(the one thing ) to be known, (the syllable ) 
Om, and also the Rik, Sàman and Yajus. 


[ Sustainer—by dispensing fruit of action. 


गतिभता TH: साची निवासः शरण Wee |i 
प्रभव: प्रलयः स्थानं निधानं बीजमव्ययमस eil 


* 


18i THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE— [Chap. 2. 


IX. ite. 

ma: The goal wat supporter qu: Lord साक्षी the 
witness निवासः abode शरण refuge gga friend प्रनव: 
origin yaa: dissolution tary substratum निधान 
storehouse बींजम the seed ग्रव्ययस्‌ immutable. 

The Goal, the Supporter, the Lord, the 
Witness, the Abode, the Refuge, the Friend, 
the Origin, the Dissolution, the Substratum, 
the Storehouse, the Seed immutable, 

[ Seed: cause of the origin of all things. 


{mmutable—because it endures so long as the 
Samsara endures. | 


तपाम्यहमहं वर्ष निञ्ह्वाम्युत्लुजामि च ॥ 


+ A e 
Wat चव झत्युश्च Uauurnag ॥१६॥ 
Lx I8. 

THT O Arjuna gz I तपामि give heat xyz I 
ag the rain उत्सूज्ञामि send forth च and faerie 
withhold स्मतं immortality y and एव also मृत्यु: death 
q and xz lupa being च and aa non-being. 

( As sun) I give heat: I withhold and send 
forth the rain; I am immortality and also 
death, the being and non-being am I, O 
Arjuna! j 

[ Being: The manifested world of effects. 

Non-being—means, the cause which is un- 
manifested oniy, and not non-existence ; otherwise 
we have to conceive existence coming out of non- 
existence, which is absurd. The Sruti says, 


“How can existence come out of non-existênce ?” 
—Chhand. Upa. 6. | 


त्रैविद्या मां सोमपाः पूतपापा 
Am Ce e a 
FACS स्त्रीति प्रार्थयन्ते ॥ 


18-21] AND THE KINGLY SECRET 185 
v ~ ~ 
a एसयमासाच सुरन्द्रलाक- 
LA uns ~ OS € K € 
Hata [894311814 SS HIIS ॥२०॥ 
LX. 20: 

विद्याः The knowers of the three Vedas यज्ञैः by 
Yajnas qf me ger having worshipped सोमपाः the 
drinkers of Soma पुतपापाः purified from sin स्वर्गंति 
passage to heaven प्रार्थयन्ते (they ) pray ले they 
gug holy सुरेन्द्रलो कम the world of the Lord of the 
Devas आसाद्य having reached ff in heaven 
fessum divine देवभोगाद the pleasures of the Devas 
अश्चांन्त enjoy. 

The knowers ofthe three Vedas, having wor- 
shipped Me by Yajna, drunk the Soma, and 
(thus) been purified from sin, pray for 
passage to heaven; reaching the holy world 
of the Lord of the Devas, they enjoy in 
heaven the divine pleasures of the Devas. 


| Lord of the Devas—lndra, who is called Sata- 
kratu, because he had performed a hundred 
sacrifices. | 
» EN * 


ते d yra स्वगलोकं विशालं 
चश पुण्ये सत्यलोकं विशन्ति॥ 


aq अयीधममलजुप्रपत्षा 
गतागतं कामकामा लभन्ते ॥२१॥ 
IN, 21. 


से They ते that बिशाल vast स्वर्गलोकं the Swarga- 
world yaar having enjoyed yà merit eta at the 
exhaustion मृत्येलोकं the mortal world विशन्ति (they ) 
enter एवं thus afaa injunctions of the three 
{ Vedas) अआतुप्रपन्ना: abiding by कामकामाः desiring 
desires गतागतं state of going and that of coming 
त्तभन्त attain to. 


186 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chapa 


Having enjoyed the vast Swarga-world, 
they enter the mortal world, on the exhaustion 
of their merit: Thus, abiding by the in- 
junctions of the three (Vedas), desiring desires, 
they (constantly ) come and go. 

| Znjuncfions—Ritualistic, the Karma-Kánda. ] 
अनन्याश्विन्तयन्तो मां ये जनाः पयुपासते ॥ 
तेषां नित्याभियुक्तानां योगक्षेम वहाम्यहम्‌ ॥२२॥ 

DS. 22 

अनन्याः Non-separate मा me चिन्तयन्तः meditating 
ये who जनाः persons पर्यापासते worship (Me ) in all 
things नित्यामियुक्तानां steadfast wholly and con- 
stantly तेषां to them अहं I योगक्षेमं the supply of what 
is lacking and the preservation of what is already 
possessed वृहामि carry 

Persons who, meditating on Me as non- 
separate, worship Me in all beings, to them 
thus steadfast wholly and constantly, f carry 
what they lack and preserve what they al- 
ready have. 


| Anaxydk—as non-separate i. e., looking upon 
ihe Supreme Being as not separate from their own 
self. Or Ananydh may mean, without any other 
(thought). Then the translation of the sloka 
should be—persons who worship Me in all beings 
never harbouring any other thought, to them &c 

{carry &¢—Because while other devotees work 
for their own gain and safety, those who see nothing 
as separate from themselves, do not do so, even 
they do not cherish a desire for life or death 
the Lord secures to them gain and safety. ] 


येऽप्यन्यदेवता भक्ता यजन्ते श्वद्धयाइन्विताः ॥ 
तेऽपि मामेव कोन्तेय यजन्त्यविधिपूवेकम ॥२३॥ 


e 


21-25] NINTH CHAPTER 187 


IX $35. 

zr O son of Kunti sgar with Shraddha 
srfezar: endued ( with ) भक्ता: devotees ये who ञ्रन्य- 
देवताः other gods अपि even यजन्ते worship ते they 
fg too fag qudm by wrong method माँ me एव 
alone य॒ज्जन्ति worship. 

Even those devotees, who endued with 
Shraddha, worship other gods, they too, wor- 
ship Me alone, O son of Kunti ; ( but) by the 
wrong method. 


[ Wrong method—ignorantly, not in the way by 
which they can get Moksha. | 


अह हि सवेयज्ञानां भोक्ता च प्रसुरेवे च ॥ 
न तु मामभिजानन्ति तत्त्वेनातञ्चचचन्ति ते ॥२४॥ 
LX. 6034. 
हि Indeed सर्वयज्ञानास्‌ of all Yajnas अह्‌ I एव alone 
भोक्ता enjoyer च and yy: Lord = and ते they तु but 
Wf me तत्वेन in reality न ग्रभिज्ञानन्ति do not know 
अतः hence 'च्यवन्ति (they ) fall ( return ) 
For 1 alone am the Enjoyer, and Lord of 
all Yajnas ; but because they do not know Me 
in reality, they return, ( to the mortal world ) 


[ They refurn—By worshipping other gods they 
attain no doubt to the spheres of their sacrifice, but 
after the exhaustion of their results, they fall from 
those spheres and return to the mortal world. ] 


यान्ति देवबता देवान पितृन्यान्ति पितृत्रताः ॥ 
भूतानि यान्ति भूतेज्या यान्ति मद्याजिनोऽपि माम २ 
IX. 25. 


देवत्रत्ता: Votaries of the Devas दवान the Devas 
यान्ति go to पितृत्रताः the votaries of the Pitris पितृन्‌ 


188 THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE— [ Chap. 9. 


the Pitris यान्ति go to भूतेज्याः the worshippers of 
Bhutas भूतानि Bhutas यान्ति go to मद्याजिना my 
votaries आपि too qp me यान्ति go to. 

Votaries of the Devas, go to the Devas; 
to the Pitris, go their votaries ; to the Bhutas, 
go the Bhuta worshippers; My votaries too 
come unto Me. 


[ Bhuias—beings lower than the Devas, but 
higher than human beings. 


] 
à 


ilde—The Imperishable. | 
पत्र पुष्पे फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छाति॥ 
तदह सकत्युपद्दतमश्चामि प्रयतात्मनः ॥२६॥ 
IX. 26. 

a:.Whoever मे to me भक्त्या with devotion q4 
a leaf पुष्पं a flower फलं a fruit तोयं water प्रयच्छाति 
offers अहं I प्रयतात्मनः of the pure-minded भव्त्युपहतस 
the devout gift तत्‌ that अश्चञामि accept. 

Whoever, with devotion offers Me, a leaf, 
a flower, a fruit, water, that I accept ;—the 
devout gift of the pure-minded. 


[ Not only the single devotion to the Supreme 
leads to imperishable result i. e., Moksha, but it is 
also 30 easy and simple to perform,—says Krishna 
in this and the next two slokas. ] 


यत्करोषि AAT EID ददासि यत ॥ 
यत्तपस्यसि कोन्तेय तत्कुरुष्व मदर्पणम्‌ ॥२७॥ 
IN 2X है 
कोन्तेय 00 son of Kunti aa whatever meaty thou 
doest यत्‌ whatever Zante thou eatest ga whatever 


जुद्दोधि thou offerest in sacrifice gx whatever ददासि 
thou givest away यत्‌ whatever तपस्यसि thou practisest 





25-29 ] AND THE KINGLY SECRET 189 
as austerity qa that मदर्पणं offering unto me 
wasq do. 

Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest, 
whatever thou offerest in sacrifice, whatever 
thou givest away, whatever austerity thou 
practisest, O son of Kunti, do that as an 
offering unto Me. 

CC UE NOE. S 
शुभाशुभफलरव साक््यस कमवल्थन, | 
सेन्यासयोगयुक्तात्मा विसुक्तो माझुपेष्यसि ॥२५॥ 

IX. 28. 

एवं Thus शुभ good अझुभ evil ma: from results 
कमेवन्धने: from the bondages of actions मोक्ष्यसे 
(thou) shalt be freed from fag: liberated सन्यास- 
योग Yoga of renunciation gerest with the heart 
steadfast in माँ unto me उपेष्यासे (thou) shalt 
come. 

Thus shalt thou be freed from the bondages 
of actions, bearing good and evil results: 
with the heart steadfast in the Yoga of 
renunciation, and liberated, thou shalt come 
unto Me. 

[ The Yoga of renunciation—This way of puri- 


fication of the heart by offering everything to the 
Lord. 


Liberated—thou shalt be liberated while in the 
body, and at its death, become Me. 
gnti सवेभूतेषु न मे हेष्योऽस्ति न प्रिय: ॥ 
ये भजन्ति तु मां भक्त्या मयि ते तेषु चाप्यहम्‌ RE 
IX. 29. 
gz I सर्वभूतेष to all beings समः the same मे to me 
न्‌ not Wess: hateful q not प्रिय: dear स्ति is ये those 


150 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap.9. 


z but af me भक्त्या with devotion भञ्जन्ति worship ते 
they मयि in me च्‌ and sz 1 अपि too तेषु in them. 

I am the same to all beings: to Me there is 
none hateful nor dear. But those who wor- 
‘ship Me with devotion, they are in Me, and 
I too am in them. 


[Iam like fire. As fire gives heat to those who 
draw near to it, and not to those who move away 
from it, even so do I. My grace falls upon My 
devotees, but not owing to any attachment on My 
part. As the suns light, though pervading every- 
where, is reflected in a clean mirror, so also is the 
Supreme Lord present as a matter of course in those 
persons only, from whose minds all the dirt of 
ignorance has been removed by devotion. ] 


अपि चेत्सुद्राचारो भजते मामनन्यभाक्‌ ॥ 
साधुरेव स मन्तव्यः सम्यग्व्यवसितो हि स: ॥३०॥ 
लि 

aguan: The very wicked ऋषि even चेत if 
अनन्यभाक with devotion to none else मां me भजते 
worships सः he arg: good एव also egsa: should 
be regarded fg indeed सः he सम्यकू rightly व्यवासितः 
resolved. 

Even if the very wicked worship Me, with 
devotion to none else, he should be regarded 
as good, for he has rightly resolved. 


| He has rightly resolved—He is one who has 


formed a holy resolution, to abandon the evil ways 
of his life. ] 


fat भवति धमोत्मा शश्वच्छान्ति निगच्छति ॥ 


कोन्तेय प्रतिजानीहि न मे भक्त: mu ॥३१॥ 
EX कॉ. 
fat Soon धर्मात्मा righteous भवाति (he) becomes 


29-33 | NINTH CHAPTER 191. 


wera eternal शान्ति peace निगच्छति attains to कोन्तेय 
O son of Kunti my wx devotee न प्रणश्यति 
is never destroyed (इति this) प्रतिजानीहि know (do 
thou proclaim boldly ) 

Soon does he become righteous, and attains 
to eternal Peace, O son of Kunti ; boldly canst 
thou proclaim, that My devotee is never 


destroyed. 


मां हि पार्थ व्यपाश्रित्य येऽपि eq: पापयोनयः ॥ 

~ A ^ 26 C + as 

सतियो वेश्यास्तथा झूद्रास्तेऽपि यान्ति परां गतिम्‌ ३२ 
IX. 32 

पार्थ O son of Prithà ये who अषि also पापयोनयः of 
inferior birth eg: might be fa: women वेश्या 
Vaishyas तथा as well as शूद्राः Sudras @ they gf 
even af me व्यपाश्रित्य taking refuge in परा the 
supreme शति goal f£ indeed य्रान्ति attain. 

For, taking refuge in Me, they also, O son of 
Prithá, who might be of inferior birth, —women, 
Vaishyas, as well as Sudras,—even they 
attain to the Supreme Goal. 

[Of znferior birth... Sudras—Because by birth, the 
Vaishyas being engaged only in agriculture &c., 
and the women and Sudras being debarred from 
the study of the Vedas. ] 


कि घुनन्रॉझणाः पुण्या सक्ता राजपेयस्तथा N 


आनत्यमरसुख लांकामम प्राप्य AAS माम ॥३३॥ 
IX. 33 

पुण्याः Holy ब्राह्मणा: Dráhmanas तथा also wart: 

devoted राजर्षेय: Rájarshis कि Tq: how much more, 

अनिल transient ग्रसुखं joyless gå this लोक world 

श्राप्य having attained भजस्व lo thou worship माँ me, 


122 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap.9. 


What need to mention holy Brâhmanas, and 
280080 Rájarshis! Having obtained this 
transient, jovless world, worship thou Me 

- Réjarshis—kings who had attained to sainthood 
( Rishihood ). 

What need €c.: How much more easily then 

do the holy Brahmanas and the devoted royal saints 


Hlaving......wori/d—Being born in this human 
body which is hard to get, one should exert oneself 
immediatelv for perfection, without depending on 
ths future, as everything in this world is transient 
and without seeking for happiness, as it is joyless. ] 


सन्सना सव मद्भक्ता मद्याजा सा नमस्कुरु॥ 


RRITA युक्त्ववसात्सांन मत्परायरा. ॥३४॥ 
LX. gi 

aaar With mind filled with me मक्त; my 
Gevolee मद्याजी sacrificer unto me भव be thou मा to 
me नम॒स्झुझ bow down एवं thus मत्परायण: taking me 
as the supreme goal आत्मा heart qae having 
made steadfast माँ me एव alone एष्यसि thou shalt 
come. 

Fil thy mind with Me, be My devotee 
sacrifice unto Me, bow down to Me; thus 
having made thy heart steadfast in Me, 
taking Me as the Supreme Goal, thou shalt 
come to Me, 


इति राजविद्याराजगुदह्ययोगो नाम नवमोऽध्यायः 


The end of the ninth chapter, designated 
THE Way OF THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE 
&ND THE KINGLY SKCRET, 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ दशमोऽध्यायः N 
TENTH CHAPTER 
श्रीसगवाजुवाच ॥ 
भूय एव महावाहो TW मे परमं वच: ॥ 
यत्तेऽहं प्रीयमाणाय वक्ष्यामि हितकाम्यया ॥१॥ 
Xa qu 
भगवान The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 
महाबाहो O mighty-armed we: again एव verily ने 
my qu supreme वचः word say hear (thou) gm 
which प्रीयमाणाय who art delighted (to hear: * 
to thee az I हितकाम्थया wishing (thy) welfare 
वक्ष्यामि 1 will tell. 
The Blessed Lord said : 

Again, O mighty-armed, do thou listen to My 
Supreme word, which I, wishing thy welfare, 
wall tell thee who art delighted ( to hear Me `, 

| Supreme—as revealing the unsurpassed truth. 7 
न मे विद: सुरगशा: प्रभवं न महषयः di 
अहमादिहि देवानां महर्षीणां च सर्वशः ॥२॥ 

` है 02 

न Not सुरगणाः the hosts of Devas न nor sess 
the great Rishis 3 my प्रभवं origin fA": do know 
हि for gë I देवानां of the Devas महर्षी of the grea: 
Rishis च and सर्वेशः in everyyway आदिः source, 


164 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. IO. 


Neither the hosts of Devas, nor the great 
Rishis, know My origin, for in every way I 
am the source of all the Devas and the great 
Rishis 

Prabhavam—higher origin (birth );—though 


birtnless. vet taking various manifestations of 
power. Or it may mean, great Lordly power 


Ta ecerytcar not only as their producer, but 
also as their efficient cause, and the guider of their 
intellect, &c. | 

w g~ ho- क रु 
यो मामजमनाद च DU लॉकमहश्वरस ॥ 
HATS: स AGT सवेपापेः प्रमुच्यते ॥३॥ 

यः Who af me अनादि beginningless अ birthless 
stand लोकमहेश्वरं the great Lord of worlds बत्ति 
knows q he मर्तेपु among mortals ways: undeluded 
सर्वपापिं: from all 8105 प्रदुच्यते is freed. 

He who knows Me, birthless and begin- 
ningiess, the great Lord of worlds—he, among 
mortals, is undeluded, he is freed from all sins. 


7 4H sins—consciously or unconsciously incurred. ] 


वद्धिज्ञानमसंमोहः चमा सत्यं दमः शम: d 
gå दुःखं भवोऽभावो भयं चाभयमेव च deu 
अहिंसा समता तुष्टिस्तपो दानं यशोऽयशः ॥ 


भवन्ति सावा भूतानां मत्त एव पृथग्विधाः WAU 
De ues ह 
gfe: Intellect ज्ञानं knowledge असंमोहः non- 
delusion wat forbearance सलं truth दमः restraint of 
the external senses एम: calmness of heart सुख happi- 
ness दुःखे misery भव: birth अभाव: death wa fear च and 
एव even अभय fearlessness च as well as Har non- 


2-7 | GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 195 


injury समता even-ness gf&: contentment aq: 
austerity दानं benevolence यशः good name ग्रयश: ill- 
fame भूतानां of beings पृथक्‌ different विधा: kinds भावाः 
qualities मत्त: from me एव alone भवान्ति arise. 

Intellect, knowledge, non-delusion, for- 
bearance, truth, restraint of the externa? 
senses, calmness of heart, happiness, misery, 
birth, death, fear, as well as fearlessness, 
non-injury, even-ness, contentment, austerity, 
benevolence, good name, (as well as ) ill- 
fame ;—( these) different kinds of qualities of 
beings, arise from Me alone. 


[ Arise &c.—according to their respective Karma.) 


महर्षयः सत्त पूर्व चत्वारो मनवस्तथा d 
WRIST मानसा जाता येषां लोक इमा: प्रजा: Her 
X. 6. 

सप्त Seven महर्षयः great Rishis पूर्वे of old तथा as 
well as चत्वार: four मनवः Manus मद्भावाः possessed 
of powers like me मानसा. from mind जाताः born 
लोके in this world gar: these येषाम्‌ from whom प्रज्ञा: 
creatures. 


.lhe seven great Rishis of old, as well as 
the four Manus, possessed of powers like Me, 
( due to their thoughts being fixed on Me) 
were born of( My ) mind; from whom are 


these creatures in the world. 
एतां विर्भात योगं च मम यो aha तत्त्वत: N 
स्हो५विकस्पेन योगेन युज्यते नाज संशयः ॥७॥ 
Ar T 
यः Who मम mine vat these विभूतिम्‌ manifold 


155 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 10, 


manifestation of (my) being gmt Yoga power च 
and तत्त्वतः in reality वेत्ति knows स he yaa by 
(in? unshakable arta by. (in) Yoga युञ्यते be- 
comes established अच here न संशय: no doubt. 

He who in reality knows these manifold 
manifestation of My being and ( this ) Yoga 
power of Mine, becomes established in the 
unshakable Yoga; there is no doubt of it. 

- This Yoga power—that the great Rishis and the 
Manus possessed their power and wisdom, as 
partaking of a very small portion of the Lord's 
inünite power and wisdom. 

Cushakable Yoga: Samadhi, the state of 
steadiness in right realisation. | 


अर्हं सवस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सवे प्रवर्तते ॥ 
इति मत्वा भजन्ते मां बुधा भावसमन्विताः ॥८॥ 
Xa 58. 

rg 1 सर्वस्य of all प्रभवः the origin ay: from me 
waa everything qaem evolves इति thus मत्वा think- 
ing बुधा: the wise भावसमान्विताः with loving conscious- 
ness मां me भजन्ते worship. 

I am the origin of all, from Me everything 
evolves ,—thus thinking the wise worship Me 
with loving consciousness. 


_ Loving consciousness—ot the One Self in all. ] 


मञ्चित्ता WESUDUIT वोधयन्तः परस्परम्‌ N 
कथयन्तश्च मां नित्यं तुष्यन्ति च रमन्ति च Nell 
X. 9. 
मचिता: With (their) minds wholly in me मद्वतप्राणाः 
with (their) senses absorbed in me af me परस्परं 
mutually atqurq: enl’zhtening * and नित्य always 


४-1 1 ] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 197 


कथयन्तः speaking of w= and तुष्यन्ति (they) are 
satisfied रमान्त (they) are delighted च and. 

With their minds wholly in Me, with their 
senses absorbed in Me, mutually enlightening, 
and always speaking of Me, they are satisfied 
and delighted. 

[ Satisfied : when there is cessation of all thirst. 

Says the Purana: All the pleasures of the senses 
in the world, and also all the great happiness in 
the Divine spheres, are not worth a sixteenth part 
of that which comes from the cessation of all 
desires. | 
-— o è = e efit eM T e 
तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतां ध्रीतिपूवकस॥ 
ददामि बुद्धियोगे तं येन मासुपयान्ति ते ॥१०॥ 

X. IO. 

सततसुक्तानास्‌ Ever steadfast ग्रीतिपूवेकर with 818०३ 
tion yaara serving तेषास to them q that graat 
Buddhi Yoga gana (I) give येन by which ले they सा", 
me उपयान्ति ( they ) come unto ( me ). i 

To them, ever steadfast and serving Me © 
with affection, I give that Buddhi Yoga by 
which they come unto Me. 

[ Buddhi Yoga—Devolion of right knowledge, 
thtough Dhyana, of My essential nature as devoid 


of all limitations. 
See II. 39.] 


तेषामेबवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानर्ज तभ: N 


नाशयास्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भांसता ॥११॥ 
X. II. 
तेषां For them अनुकम्पाथेस out of compassion एव 
mere अह I आस्मभावस्थः abiding in (their) hearts 
भास्वता luminous ज्ञानदीपेन byghe lamp of knowledge 
iA 


198 | SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 10, 


अज्ञानज born of ignorance तमः the darkness ( of 
their mind ) नाशयामि (1) destroy. 

Out of mere compassion for them, I, abiding 
in their hearts, destroy the darkness (in them) 
born of ignorance, by the luminous lamp of 
knowledge. 


[ Luminous lamp of knowledge—characterised by 
discrimination; fed by the oil of contentment of 
Bhakti; fanned by the wind of absorbing meditation 
on Me ; furnished by the wick of pure consciousness 
evolved by the constant cultivation of Brahma- 
charyam and other pious virtues; held in the reservoir 
of the heart devoid of worldliness; placed in the 
wind-sheltered recess of the mind, withdrawn from 
the sense-objects, and untainted by attachment and 
aversion; shining with the light of right knowledge, 
engendered by incessant practice of concentration, 
— Sankara. | 


अञ्जन उवाच ॥ 

परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान ॥ 
पुरुष शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम ॥१श॥ 
SITESSUZUU: सर्वे देवर्षिनारदस्तथा ॥ 

CM OX ~ "HEY e. ~ 
असितो देवलो व्यासः स्वयं चेव ब्रवीषि मे esi 

AX 2.43. 

अजुन: Arjuna उवाच said: 

wart Thou पर Supreme ब्रह्म Brahman qi Su- 
preme धाम abode परमं Supreme पवित्र purifier (sr 
and) सर्वे all ऋषयः the Rishis देवार्षः Deva-Rishi 
नारद: Narada तथा as well as ग्रासितः Asita देवलः 
Devala व्यास: Vyasa त्वां thee शाश्वतं the eternal 
gaa Purusha दिव्य self-luminous आदिदेवं the first 
Deva gå birthless fay the all-pervading आह (they) 


declared स्वयं thyself च and एव also मे to me ब्रवीषि 
(thou) sayest 


"n 


X1-15] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 199 


Arjuna said: 

The Supreme Brahman, the Supreme 
Abode, the Supreme Purifier, art Thou. All 
the Rishis, the Deva-Rishi Narada as well as 
Asita, Devala and Vyasa have declared Thee 
as the Eternal, the Self-luminous Purusha, 
the first Deva, birthless and All-pervading. 
So also Thou Thyself, sayest to me. 
सचमेतदते मन्ये qeni वदसि केशव di 
न दत सरगावन्व्याक्त वदुरवा न दानवा: ॥१४॥ 

X. I4. 

केशव O Keshava qf to me यत्‌ what वदसि (thou) 
sayest एतत्‌ that qa all aq true मन्ये (1) regard f= verily 
भगवन्‌ O Bhagavan ते thy व्याक्ति manifestation स 
neither देवा: Devas q nor दानवाः Dinavas (dz: do 
know. 

I regard all this that Thou sayest to me 
as true, O Keshava. Verily O Bhagavan, 
neither the Devas nor the Dánavas know Thy 
manifestation. 

| Bhagavén—is He in Whom ever exist in their 
fulness, all powers, all Dharma, all glory, all 
success, all renunciation and all freedom. 4A/so—He 
that knows the origin and dissolution, and the future 


of all beings, as well as knowledge and ignorance, . 
is called Bhagavan. | 


स्वयमवात्मनात्मान वेत्य त्वं पुरुषोत्तम ॥ 
भूतभावन भूतेश देवदेच जगत्पते ॥ १९॥ 
>. जक: 
पुरुषोत्तम O Purusha Supreme भूतभावन O Source 
of beings waar O Lord of beings देवदेव O Deva of 
Devas जगत्पते O Ruler off the world स्वस Thou 


900 | SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 10. 


स्वयस Thyself एव verily ग्रात्मना by Thyself आत्मा 
Thyself eq (thou) knowest. 

Verily, Thou Thyself knowest Thyself by 
Thyself, (3 Purusha Supreme, O Source of 
beings, O Lord of beings, O Deva of Devas, 
O Ruler of the world. 
वक्तुमहेस्यशेषेश दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतय:॥ 
यासिविसूतिमिर्लोकानिमास्त्वं व्याप्य तिष्ठस्ि॥१६॥ 

Ss TRO: 

याभिः By which विभूतिभिः ( Divine ) attributes equ 
thou इमान्‌ all these लोकान worlds व्याप्य having filled 
तिष्टसि existest दिव्या divine आत्मविभूतयः thy divine 
attributes हि indeed sargu without reserve वक्तुं 
to speak of अरहसि (thou) shouldst. 

Thou shouldst indeed speak without reserve 
of Thy Divine attributes by which, filling all 
these worlds, Thou existest. 


4 


| Since none else can do so. | 

» £f. री € क ex हँ 
कय [वद्यामह यागस्त्वा सदा पाराचन्तयन॥ 
aT AT च भावेषु चिन्त्योऽसि भगवन्मया ॥१७॥ 

A A 

योगिन O ४०४४० सदा ever परिचिन्तयन्‌ meditating 
कं how त्वां thee gë I विद्यास्‌ shall know भगवन्‌ 
O Bhagavan मया by me केषु केचु in what and what 
way aspects, things = and fsTegr: to be thought of 
असि (thou) art. 

How shall I, O Yogin, meditate ever to 
know Thee? In what things, O Bhagavan, 
art Thou to be thought of by me? 


Ln what things Cz: In order that the mind 
even thinking of extemal objects, may be enabled 


15-19] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 201. 


to contemplate Theein Thy particular manifesta- 
tions in them. | 


विस्तरणात्मनां याग वभूत च जनादन Il 
सूयः कथय तात्ताह शररवता नासत HSHW NLS) 
X. 18 

जनादन O Janárdana आत्मनः thy योग Yoga powers 
विभाति attributes = and विस्तरेण in detail मूयः again 
कथय speak of f= for gå the ambrosia श्रृश्वत्त: to 
( me) who am hearing मे to me तृप्तिः satiety न अस्ति 
there is not. 

Speak to me again in detail, O Janárdana, 
of Thy Yoga-powers and attributes ; for Iam 
never satiated in hearing the ambrosia ( of 
Thy speech ). 


[ Fanérdana—to Whom all pray for prosperity 
and salvation. | 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 
हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः ॥ 
प्राधान्यतः कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे NEM 
Xn ho 

श्रीभगवान The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

- हन्त 0 gàg best of the Kurus दिव्याः divine 
ग्रात्मविभुतयः my attributes प्राधान्यतः according to 
their prominence ते to thee कर्थायष्यामि (1) shall speak 
of हि for मे my विस्तरस्य of manifoldness speq: end 
नास्ति there is not. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

I shall speak to thee now, O best of the 
Kurus, of My Divine attributes, according to 
their prominence ; there is no end to the mani- 
foldness of My manifestation, 


202 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap, 10. 


[ According fo their prominence, i. e., only where 
they are severally the most prominent. ] 


अहमात्मा गुडाकेश सवेभूताशयस्थितः ॥ 
अहमादिश्च मध्यं च भूतानामन्त एव च ॥२०॥ 
X. 20. 

शुडाकेश O Gudakesha सर्वमृताशयस्थितः existent in 
the heart of all beings ग्रात्मा the Self अहे I भूतानां 
of ( all ) beings आदि: the beginning मध्ये the middle 
आन्तः the end @ and अह I एव also. 

I am the Self, O Gudàkesha, existent in 
the heart of all beings; I am the beginning, 
the middle, and also the end of all beings. 

| Gudákesha—conqueror of sleep. 
Beginning efc.—Thatis, the birth, the life, and 
the death of all beings. ] 

| e. o e. we PS e PN o 
ञादत्यानामह वष्णुज्यातषा रावरशुमान ॥ 
मरीचिमरुतामस्मि नक्षत्राणामहं शशी ॥२१॥ 

X. 21. 

न अहे I आदित्याना of the (twelve) Adityas Asy: 
Vishnu ज्योतिषा of luminaries गअशुमान the radiant 
रावि: the sun agar of the winds (forty-nine wind-gods) 
मरीचिः Marichi faq (D) am नक्षवाशाम of the aster- 
isms gg I शशी the moon. 

` Of the Adityas I am Vishnu; of luminaries, 
the radiant Sun ; of the winds, I am Marichi ; 
of the asterisms, the Moon. 


वेदानां सामवेदोऽस्मि देवानामस्मि वासव:॥ 


इन्द्रियाणां मनश्चास्मि भूतानामस्मि चेतना ॥२२॥ 
X. 22. 
वेदान Of the Vedas सामवेद: Sama Veda rat (I) 


19-25] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 203 


am देवानां of the gods वासवः Vasava अस्मि (I) am 
इन्द्रियाणाम्‌ of the senses मनः Manas च and अस्मि (1) 
am भूतानां in living beings चेतना intelligence आस्मि 
(I) am. 

I am the SAma-Veda of the Vedas, Vasava 
( Indra) of the gods, and of the senses I am 
Manas, and intelligence in living beings am I, 


रुद्राणां शंकरश्चास्मि वित्तेशो यक्षरक्षसाम ॥ 
वसूनां पावकश्चास्मि मेरुः शिखारशामहम्‌॥२३॥ 
254-256 

रद्राणा Of the Rudras शंकर: Shankara च and अस्मि 
(I) am यक्षरक्षसाम of the Yakshas and the Rakshasas 
वित्तेश: the Lord of wealth (Kuvera) (आस्मि I am) quet 
of the Vasus पावकः Pavaka स्मि (I) am शिखरिणा of 
mountains मरू: Meru (ञ्स्मि I am). 

And of the Rudras Jam Shankara, of the 
Yakshas and Rakshasas the Lord of wealth 
( Kuvera ), of the Vasus I am Pavaka, and of 
mountains, Meru am 1. 

- è 2 e C 0 e C 
पुराधसा च मुख्य मा वाळू पाथ बृहसरपातम ll 
सेनानीनामहं स्कंद: सरसामस्मि सागर: ॥२४॥ 

? X. 24. 

पार्थ O son of Pritha मां me पुरोधसां of the priests 
सुख्यम the chief वृहस्पात Brihaspati qand विद्धि know 
(thou) ग्रहं I सेनानीनां of generals स्कंद: Skanda सरसां 
of bodies of water सागर: the ocean ग्रास्मि (1) am. 

And of priests, O son of Prithà, know Me 
the chief, Brihaspati; of generals, I am 
Skanda ; of bodies of water, I am the ocean 


महर्षीणां ward गिरामस्सयेकमंचरम्‌ ॥ 


204 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 10, 


यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालय: ॥२९॥ 
X. 25. 

अहं I महर्षाणाम of the great Rishis wy: Bhrigu 
गिरां of words एकं the one spat the syllable “Om” 
अस्मि (I) am यज्ञानां of Yajnas जपयज्ञः the Yajna of 
Japa (silent repetition) स्थावराणां of immovable 
things हिमालय: the Himalaya आस्मि (I) am. 

Of the great Rishis I am Bhrigu ; of words 
I am the one syllable “Om”; of Yajnas I 
am the Yajna of Japa (silent repetition ) ; of 
immovable things the Himalaya. 


[ Yajna of Fapa—because there is no injury or 
loss of life involved in it, itis the best purifier of 
all Yajnas. ] 


अश्वत्यः सवेइक्षाशां देवर्षाशां च नारदः ॥ 
गन्धर्वाणां चित्ररथः सिद्धानां कपिलो Ata: ॥२६॥ 
2९. 26. 

सर्ववृत्ताणां Of all trees अश्वत्यः the Asvattha देवर्षीणां 
of the Deva-Rishis च and नारदः Narada गन्धर्वाणाम्‌ of 
Gandharvas चित्ररथ: Chitraratha सिद्धानां of the per- 
fected ones क्रपिलः Kapila gfq: the Muni. 

Of all trees (I am) the Ashvattha, and 
Narada of Deva-Rishis ; Chitraratha of Gan- 
dharvas am I, and the Muni Kapila of the 
perfected ones. 
उच्चे:अवसम श्वानां विद्धि MAZARIN ॥ 
ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां नराणां च नराधिपम्‌ ॥२७॥ 

X. 27. 

अश्वानां Among horses अमृतोडूव Amrita-born उच्चे:- 
sağ Uchchaisshrava गजेन्द्राणाम्‌ of lordly elephants 
ऐरावतस Airdvata नराणां of men qqa the king च 
and मास्‌ me बिद्धि know, ( thou ). 


25-30] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 205 


Know Me among horses as Uchchais- 
shrava, Amrita-born; of lordly elephants 
Airávata, and of men the king. 


[ Amrifa-born: Brought forth from the ocean 
when it was churned for the nectar. | 


अयुधानामहं AF धेनूनामस्मि कामधुक्‌ N 
प्रजनश्चास्मि HAT: सपाणामस्मि वासुकिः।२८॥ 
ह. अ 

आयुधानाम्‌ Of weapons अम्‌ I वज्ञस the thunder- 
bolt sara of cows कामधुक्‌ Kamadhuk ( Suravi, the 
heavenly cow yielding all desires) अस्मि (I) am (अहम 1) 
प्रजनः cause of offspring कन्दर्पः Kandarpa = and 
अस्मि (I) am सर्पाणाम्‌ of serpents वाखकिः Vasuki अस्मि 
(I) am. 

Of weapons I am the thunderbolt, of cows 
I am Kamadhuk; I am the Kandarpa, the 
cause of offspring ; of serpents I am Vasuki. 


अनन्तश्चास्मि नागानां वरुणो यादसामहम्‌ ॥ 


पितृणामयेमा चास्मि यमः संयमतासहम्‌ ॥२६॥ 
X. 20. 
armat Of snakes अनन्तः Ananta अस्मि (I) am याद- 
साम्‌ of water-beings अहे 1 वरुण: Varuna (अस्मि I am) 
पितृणाम्‌ of Pitris अयमा Aryama चत syféq (I) am 
संयमताम्‌ of controllers yz I यमः Yama (afèr I am.) 
And Ananta of snakes I am, I am Varuna 
of water-beings; and Aryama of Pitris I am, 
] am Yama of controllers. 


प्रहादश्वास्मि दैत्यानां कालः कलयतामहम्‌ N 
„गाणां च मृगेन्द्रोऽहं SAI ॥३०॥ 
15 


206 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. Io, 


X. 30. 
दैत्यानाम्‌ Of Diti's progeny च and Tele: Prahlada 
अस्मि (I) am कलयताम्‌ of measurers s I काल: time 
(mièr I am) Beara of beasts sẹ I च and सरोन्द्रः 
the lord of beasts (lion) पक्षिणां of birds वैनतेयः 
son of Vinatá, Garuda * and. 
And Prahlada am I of Diti’s progeny, of 
measurers I am Time; and of beasts I am the 
lord of beasts, and Garuda of birds. 


पवन: पवतामस्मि रामः शस्त्रभृतामहम्‌ 


झपषाणां मकरश्चास्मि स्रोतसामास्म ASAT ॥३१॥ 
Ne 3r 
वता Of purifiers पवन: the wind आस्मि (T)am शस्त्र तास 
of wielders of weapons (warriors) yz I शमः Rama 
(आस्मि I am) ऋषाणा of fishes मकरः Makara ( shark ) 
ग्रास्म (D am स्रोतसास्‌ of streams जाहबी the Jahnavi, 
Ganges अस्मि (I) am. 
Of purifiers I am the wind, Rama of 

warriors am I; of fishes I am the shark, of 
streams I am Jabnavi {the Ganges) 


सर्गाणामादिरन्तथ्व मध्यं चेवाहमञ्जुन || 
अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वादः प्रवदतामहम्‌ ॥३२॥ 


Roy UA 

अज्ञुन O Arjuna arat of manifestations आदि: 
the beginning req: the end मध्यम the middle च and 
अहम 1 एव also विद्यानाम्‌ of all knowledges searen- 
विद्या the knowledge of the Self प्रवदताम of dis- 
putants ( and) spz I वाद: Váda. 

Of manifestations I am the beginning and 
the middle and also the end ; of all knowl- 


30-34] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 207 


edges I am the knowledge of the Self, and 
Vada of disputants. 

[ Véda. Discussion is classified under three 
heads: 1. Vida 2. Vitandà 3. Jalpa. 

In the first, the object is to arrive at truth ; in the 
second, idle carping at the arguments of another, 
without trying to establish the opposite side of the 
question: and in the third, the assertion of one's 
own opinion, and the attempt to refute that of the 
adversary by overbearing reply or wrangling re- 
Joinder. | 


अच्तरागामकारोएस्मि इन्द: सामासिकस्यच ॥ 


- w ~ £F ~ 
अहमवाचयः काला ATATS वश्वतामुखः ॥३३॥ 
Ae 50 

Bacay Of letters अकारः the letter A srfeq (I) am 
सामासिकस्य of all compounds sp and gag: (that called 
in Sanskrit as) dvanda, the copulative yz I एव alone 
अक्षय: the inexhaustible कालः Time gga I विश्वतो मुख: 
the All-formed धाता the sustainer (by distributing 
fruits of actions ). 

Of letters the letter A am J, and Dvanda of 
all compounds; Myself the inexhaustible 
lime, I the sustainer ( by dispensing fruits of 
actions ) All-formed. 

| Znexhaustible Time, 1. e., Eternity. Kala spoken 
of before is finite time. ] 


BY: सवेहरस्वाहसुद्धवश्व भविष्यताम्‌ N 
कीतिः श्रीर्वाक्च नारीणां स्म्तिर्मेधा fer: चमा ३४ 
>... 34s 
sz 1 सर्वहरः the all-seizing भृत्युः death भविष्यताम्‌ 
of those who are to be prosperous उद्भव: the pros- 
perity च and नारीणाम्‌ of the feminine काति: fame श्रीः 


208 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 10, 


prosperity ( or beauty ) are inspiration (lit. speech) 
स्वाति: memory मेधाः intelligence yf: constancy 
«ar forbearance «qp and (अदे I). 

And I am the all-seizing Death, and the 
prosperity of those who are to be prosperous ; 
of the feminine (I am) Fame, Prosperity (or 
beauty ), and Inspiration, Memory, Intelli- 
gence, Constancy, and Forbearance. 


SHIA तथा BAT गायत्री रुन्दसामहम्‌ ॥ 
मासानां मागेशीर्पोऽहसतूनां कुसुमाकरः ॥३५॥ 


US 25. 

अह 1 तथा also साम्ना of Sima hymns वृहतसाम 
Brihat-Sàma छन्दसा of metres ग्रहे I गायची Gayatri 
मासाना of months मार्गशी्थ: Márgashirsha ऋतूनाम्‌ of 
seasons कुछुमाकरः the flowery season. 

Of Sàmas also Iam the Brihat-Sàma, of 
metres Gayatri am I; of months I am Marga- 
shirsha, of seasons the flowery season. 

pL.Mdrgashirsha—month including parts of 
November and December. 

flowery season —Spring.] 
यूतं छलयतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्थिनामहम ॥ ——C 
जयोऽस्मि व्यवसायोऽस्मि सत्वं सत्ववतामहम ३६ 

X. 36. 

अहं 1 छलयतास्‌ of the fraudulent aqq the gam- 
bling तेजस्विनास of the powerful तेजः power आस्मि (1) 
am अहे 1 जय: victory अस्मि (I) am व्यवसाय: effort 
अस्मि (1) am सत्ववत्ताम of the Sáttvic सत्वं the Sattva 
( आस्म lam). 

‘ I am the gambling,of the fraudulent, I am 


34-39] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 209 


the power of the powerful; I am victory, I 
am effort, I the Sàttva of the Sáttvic. 

| Z am victory, J am effort: Y am victory of the 
victorious, I am the effort of those who make an 
effort. ] 


वृष्णीनां वासुदेवोऽस्मि पाणडवानां धनंजयः ॥ 
सुनीनामप्यहं व्यासः कवीनामुशनाः कावे: ॥३७॥ 
A 37, 

अहे 1 वृष्णीनाम्‌ of the Vrishnis वासुदेवः Vasudeva 
पाशडवानाम्‌ of the Pandavas धनंजयः Dhananjaya 
आपि also मुनीनाम्‌ of the Munis व्यासतः Vyasa कतीनाम्‌ 
of the sages उशनाः Ushanas कवि: the sage ञ्स्मि 
(I)am. 

Of the Vrishnis I am Vasudeva; of the 
Pandavas, Dhananjaya ; and also of the Munis 
I am Vyasa; of the sages, Ushanás the sage. 


दण्डो दमयतामस्मि नीतिरस्मि जिगीषताम॥ 


मोने चेवास्मि गुह्यानां ज्ञानं ज्ञानवतामहम्‌ ॥३८॥ 
Ni. 780. 

ग्रहं 1 दमयताम्‌ of punishers दण: the sceptre 
आस्मि am जिगीषताम of those who seek to conquer 
नातः the polity अस्मि (I) am शुह्यानाम्‌ of things secret 
मानम्‌ silence एव च andalso अञ्रस्मि (I) am ज्ञानवताम 
of knowers ज्ञानम the knowledge 

Of punishers I am the sceptre; of those 
who seek to conquer, I am the polity ; and 
also of things secret I am silence, and the 
knowledge of knowers am I 


TAMI सवेभूताना बाज तदहमऊुन ॥ 
न तदारत चना यत्स्यान्मया भूत चराचरस॥३६॥ 


210 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. Io. 


Xe 30. 

aga © Arjuna यत्‌ what च and सर्वभूतानाम्‌ of all 
beings बीजम्‌ the seed तत्‌ that sra I अपि also मया विना 
without me यत्‌ what स्यात can exist तत्‌ that चराचरम्‌ 
moving or unmoving भूतं being न अ्रास्त there is not. 

And whatsoever is the seed of all beings, 
that also am I, O Arjuna. There is no 
being, whether moving or unmoving, that 
can exist without Me. 
नान्तोऽस्ति मम दिव्यानां विभूतीनां परन्तप ॥ 

~ ~ ON A - ot - 
एप qa4d: प्राक्ता व्भूतावस्तरा मया ॥४०॥ 
X. 40. 

परन्तप © scorcher of foes मम my दिव्यानाम्‌ of 
Divine विभूतीनाम्‌ of manifestations of attributes 
अन्त: end q not ग्रास्ति 3 एष this तु only विभूतेः of 
attribute fqeqx: particulars मया by me उद्देशतः partially 
Tih: has been stated. 

There is no end to the manifestations of 
My Divine attributes, O scorcher of foes; but 
this is a partial statement by Me of the parti- 
culars of My Divine attributes. 

ही ही + n6 e ~ 
यद्याद्भावतमत्सत्त्व श्रामदाजतमंत्र वा ॥ 
तत्तदेवावगच्छ त्वं मम तेजांष्शसंभवम ॥४१॥ 
As did. 

विभातिमत Great औमत prosperous वा or एव also 
ऊजितम powerful यत्‌ Fa whatever सत्त्वस्‌ being qa तत्‌ 
that एवं also मम my तेज्ञाऽश a part of splendour 
संभवम्‌ a product of eq thou अवगच्छ know. 

Whatever being there is great, prosperous 
or powerful, that know thou to be a product of 
a part of My splendour, 


39-42] GLIMPSES OF THE DIVINE GLORY 211 


As e -- 
अथवा बहुनतेन कि ज्ञातेन तवाजुन N 


विष्टभ्याहमिदं रत्स्ममे कांशेन स्थितो जगत्‌ ॥४२॥ 
X. 42. 
` gar Or अज्ञुन O Arjuna waa by this qgar (by) 
many grew to know तव thy कि what (avails) अहं I 
इदं this Her whole Sara world एकांशेन by a portion 
बिएभ्य supporting स्थित: exist. 

But what avails thee to know all this diver- 
sity, O Arjuna? (Know thou this that) I 
exist, supporting this whole world by a portion 
of Myself. 


इति विभूतियोगो नाम दशमोष्ध्यायः॥ 
The end of the tenth chapter designated, 
THE GLIMPSES OF DIVINE GLORY. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ एकादशोऽध्यायः ॥ 
ELEVENTH CHAPTER 


BSA उवाच di 
मदनुग्रहाय परमं गुद्यमध्यात्मसंज्ितम्‌ ॥ 


यत्त्वयोक्तं वचस्तेन मोहोऽयं विगतो मम ॥१॥ 
Rk. d. 

अर्जुन: Arjuna उवाच्‌ said : 

मदनुग्रहाय Out of compassion towards me qu; 
supremely sra Ta profound अच्यात्मसंज्ितम on the 
subject of the discrimination of Self and non-Self 
यत्‌ that वचः word त्वया by thee ga spoken तेन by 
that qq my sra this are: delusion विगतः is gone. 

Arjuna said : 


By the supremely profound words, on the 
discrimination of self, that have been spoken 
by Thee out of compassion towards me, this 
my delusion is gone. 


भवाप्ययो हि भूतानां श्रुतो विस्तरशो मया N 


त्वत्तः कमलपत्राच माहात्म्यमपि चाव्ययम ॥२॥ 
WI 2: 

कमलपत्राक O Thou, with eyes like the lotus-leaf 

epu: of thee भूताना of beings भवाप्ययो the ori gin and 

dissolution मया by me विस्तरशः at length fF indeed 


1-5] ELEVENTH CHAPTER 213 


भतो have been heard ग्रब्यये inexhaustible माहात्म्यं 
greatness ग्रापे = and also. 

Of Thee, O lotus-eyed, I have heard at 
length, of the origin and dissolution of be- 
ings, as also Thy inexhaustible greatness. 
एवमेतद्यथात्य त्वमात्मानं परमेश्वर ॥ 
द्रष्टमिच्छामि ते रूपमेश्वरं पुरुषोत्तम ॥३॥ 

PEE 3 

परमेश्वर O Supreme Lord यथा as च्वम thou 
आत्मानम thyself आत्य hast declared एतत्‌ it एवं so 
पुरुषोत्तम O Purusha Supreme thy शेश्वरस रूपम्‌ 
Ishvara-Form gga to see इच्छामि (1) desire. 

So it is, O God Supreme! as Thou hast 
declared Thyself. (Still) I desire to see Thy 
Ishvara-Form, O Purusha Supreme. 

[Thy Lshvara-Form—as possessed of omnipo- 
tence, omnipresence &c., and also of infinite 
wisdom, strength, virtue and splendour.] 
मन्यसे यादि तच्छक्यं मया दष्टमिति प्रभो N 
योगेश्वर ततो मे त्वं दशयात्मानमव्ययम ॥४॥ 

ALS d 

प्रभो O Lord afa if तत्‌ that मया by me FEA to 
see शक्यम्‌ capable इति as मन्यसे Thou thinkest qa: 
then योगेश्वर O Lord of Yogis qa Thou में me 

अव्ययं immutable ग्रात्माने Self दर्शय show. 

If, O Lord, Thou thinkest me capable of 
seeing it, then, O Lord of Yogis, show me 
Thy immutable Self. 


श्रीसगवाज्ञुवाच ॥ 


पश्य मे पाथ रूपाणि शतशोऽथ सहस्त्रश: ॥ 
16 


214 THE VISION OF THE— . [Chap. If 


e e 495 e e - 0 
नानाविधाने दिव्याने नानावणांरुताने ua 
Aken X 

sirara The Blessed Lord उवाच said : 

पार्थ O son of Prithí मे my दिव्यानि celestial 
नानाविधानि different in kind नानावर्णाकहृतीनि of various 
colours and shapes @ and शतशः by the hundred 
sq and सहस्त्रशः by the thousand warfa forms 
qyq behold. 

The Blessed Lord said: | 

Behold, O son of Prithá, by the hundred 
and by the thousand, My different forms 
celestial, of various colours and shapes. 


पश्यादित्यान्वसून्‌ रुद्रानश्बिनो मरुतस्तथा ॥ 


बहुन्यदष्टपूचोणि पश्याञ्चयोणि भारत lel 
XI. 6. 

भारत O descendant of Bharata आदित्याव the 
(twelve ) Adityas qux the (eight ) Vasus agra the 
(eleven) Rudras प्रश्विनो the twin Ashvins तथा 
also aga: the Marutas ( the forty-nine wind-gods ) 
qva behold वहूनि many ageya that were not 
seen before graat wonders पश्य behold. 

Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, 
the twin Ashvins; and the Winds; behold, 
O descendant of Bharata, many wonders that 
were not seen before. 


इहंकस्थे जगत्कृत्स्नं WAT सचराचरम्‌ 
मम देहे गुडाकेश यच्चान्यट्रष्टरामिच्छसि ॥७॥ 
l : AL. 7. 
शुडाकेश O Gudákesha (Arjuna) इह inthis मम 
my देहे in body एकस्थ together zw whole सचरा- 


~e 


5-9] : — UNIVERSAL FORM 915 


चरम with the moving and the unmoving जगत 
universe अन्यत्त else च and यत्‌ that gry to see 
इच्छसि (thou desirest) अद्य now FAY see. 

See now, O Gudákesha, in this My body, 
the whole universe together with its moving 
(creatures) and immovable (objects), and all 
else that thou desirest to see. 


[Together i.e., established in one—as part of 
My body. 

All else—e.g., your success or defeat in the 
coming war, about which you have entertained a 


doubt (II. 6).] 


न तु मां शक्यसे द्रष्टमनेनेव स्वचश्चुषा ॥ 
दिव्यं ददामि ते चक्षु: पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम्‌ NH 
हज TO; 

अनेनेव With this स्वचक्षषा with eve of thine तु 
but ara me FE to see न शक्यसे thou canst not ने 
(to) thee दिव्य divine, supersensuous चक्षु: sight 
ददामि (1) give में my Wat supreme योगस Yoga पश्य्‌ 
behold. 

But thou canst not see Me with these eyes 
of thme; I give thee supersensuous sight; 
behold My Yoga Power Supreme 

[JJe—in My Universal Form 


संजय उवाच ॥ 
एवमुक्त्वा ततो राजन्‌ महायोगेश्वरो हरिः ॥ 


दर्शयामास पार्थाय परमं रूपमैश्वरम्‌ NEN 

, AI. 0. 

` संजय Sanjaya उवाच said: 

: राजन O king: ( Dhritarashtra ) महायोगेश्वर: the 
Great Lord of Yoga हरिः Hari एवं thus उक्त्वा having 


216 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAP-GITA [ Chap. 11, 


spoken qq: then qrara unto the son of Pritha 


qui supreme Wat रूप Ishvara-Form दशयामास 
showed. 


Sanjaya said: 

Having thus spoken, O king, Hari, the 
Great Lord of Yoga, then showed unto the son 
of Pritha, His Supreme Ishvara-Form— 


अनेकवक्रनयनमनेकाञ्गतदशनम्‌ i 


अनेकदिव्याभरणं दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम ॥१०॥ 
av अती. 

आनेकवक्रनयन With numerous mouths and eyes 
अनेकाइतदशनस with numerous wondrous sights 
ग्रनेकदिव्याभरणं with numerous, celestial ornaments 
दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम्‌ with numerous celestial weapons 
uplifted. 

With numerous mouths and eyes, with 
numerous wondrous sights, with numerous 
celestial ornaments, with numerous celestial 
weapons uplifted. 
दिव्यमाल्यांबरधरं दिव्यगंधानुलेपनम ॥ 
सवोश्वयेमयं देवमनन्तं विश्वतोमुखम्‌ ॥११॥ 

AI. 11 

दिव्यमाल्यांबरधर Wearing celestial garlands and 
apparel दिव्यगन्धानुलेपनम anointed with celestial- 
scented unguents सर्वाश्चर्यमयं the 2ll-wonderful देवम्‌ 
resplendent अनन्तम्‌ boundless विश्वतोमुखम्‌ all- 
formed. 

Wearing celestial garlands and apparel, 
anointed with celestial-scented unguents, the 


All-wonderful, Resplendent, Boundless and 
All-formed 


ही 


9-14] ELEVENTH CHAPTER 217 


दिवि सूयेसहस्रस्य भवेद्युगपदुत्यिता ॥ 
यदि भाः सहशी सा स्याद्गासस्तस्य महात्मनः १२ 
le. 72. 

दिवि In the sky यादे if सूयसहस्त्रस्य of a thousand 
suns भाः splendour युगपत्‌ at once उात्यिता भवेत्‌ were 
to rise up सा that तस्य of that महात्मन: of the Mighty 
Being भासतः splendour सदृशी like स्यात्‌ would be. 

If the splendour of a thousand suns were to 
rise up at once in the sky, that would be like 
the splendour of the Mighty Being. 

[ Mighty Being: The Universal Form. 


The splendour of the Universal Form excels all 
others ; it is indeed beyond compare. | 


तत्रैकस्थं जगत्कृत्सं प्रविभक्तमनेकधा ॥ 
अपश्यदेवदेवस्य शरीरे पारडवस्तदा ॥१३॥ 
NI. 13. 

तदा Then पाणडव: the son of Pándu तत्र there देव- 
देवस्य of the God of gods शरे in the body अनेकधा 
in manifold ways प्रविभक्त divided Fer whole जगत 
universe THEY resting together अपश्यत saw. 

There in the body of the God of gods, the 
san of Pandu then saw the whole universe 
resting together, with its manifold divisions. 


ततः स विस्मयाविष्टो हृष्टरोमा धनंजयः ॥ 
प्रशाम्य शिरसा देवे कृताञ्जलिरभाषत ॥१४॥ 
XI. 14. 
ततः Then स he धनंजयः Dhananjaya विस्मयाविष्टः 
filled with wonder हृष्टरों मा: with hairs standing on end 
देवं to the Deva [शिरस with ( his) head प्रणम्य bend- 
ing कृताञ्जलिः with joined palms अभाषत spoke. 


218 THE VISION OF THE— [Chap. rr. 


Then Dhananjaya, filled with wonder, with 
bis hair standing on end, bending down his 
head to the Deva in adoration, spoke with 
joined palms. 

| Deva: The God, in His Universal Form. ] 

अजुन उवाच ॥ 

पश्यामि देवांस्तव देव देहे 

aiaa भूतविशेषसंघान्‌ ॥ 
ब्रह्माणमीशं कमलासनस्थ- 
aia सवोनुरगांश्च दिव्यान्‌ ॥१५॥ 

- AL- f 
IAA: Arjuna उवाच said : | 
देव O Deva aq thy देहे in the body सर्वान्‌ all 

देवात the Devas तथा and भूतविशेषसघान hosts of all 
grades of beings ईंश the Lord कमलासनस्थम seated 
on the lotus ब्रह्माणम Brahma yta Rishis च and 
aata all दिव्यान्न celestial उरगान्‌ serpents = and 

पश्यामि (1) see. | 

Arjuna said : 


ty 1 


I see all the devas, O Deva, in Thy body, 
and hosts of all grades of beings ; Brahmá, 
the Lord, seated on the lotus, and all the: 
Rishis and celestial serpents, 
अनेकवाटटदरवक्रनेत्र 

पश्यामि त्वां सवतोऽनंतरूपम्‌ ॥ 
नान्तं न मभ्यं न पुनस्तवादि 
पश्यामि विश्वेश्वर विश्वरूप ॥१६॥ 
र XI. 16. 
` विश्वेश्वर O Lord of the Universe विश्वरूप O Uni- 
versal Form अनेकबाहदरवक्रनेत्रं with manifold arms,: 


¥4-18 ] —UNIVERSAL FORM 219 


stomachs, mouths, and eyes अनंतरूपम of bound- 
less form स्वाम्‌ thee सर्वतः on every side पश्यामि (I) 
see qq of thee पुन: also q neither spem the end 
न nor -मध्यम्‌ the middle न nor आदि the beginning 
पश्यामि do (I) see. 

I see Thee of boundless form on every side 
with manifold arms, stomachs, mouths and 
eyes; neither the end nor the middle, nor 
also the beginning of Thee do I see, O Lord 
of the Universe, O Universal Form. 


~ [am o e अ mo * 
किरींटिनं गदिनं चाक्रेशा च 
तेजोराशं सवतो दीप्िमन्तम्‌॥ 
पश्यामि त्वां दुर्निरीक्ष्यं WHATS 
दीप्तानलाकझतिमप्रमयम ॥१७॥ 
XI I7 
किरीटिनम One with diadem गदिनम with club चक्रिणर 
with discus @q and @qq: everywhere दाषिमन्तम 
shining तेजाराशिम्‌ a mass of radiance दुर्निरीक्ष्यं very 
hard to look at दीप्तानलाकंद्यतिम blazing lke burn- 


ine fire and sun अ्प्रमयस immeasurable स्वाम thee 
समन्तात all around पश्यामि 1 see 


I see Thee with diadem, club, and discus; 
amass of radiance shining everywhere, very 
hard to look at, all around blazing like burn- 
ine fire and sun, immeasurable. 
त्वमचूर परम वादतव्य 

त्वमस्य [वश्वस्य पर [नधानम dd 
त्वमव्यय. शाश्वतश्चमगाप्ता 


garama पुरुषों मता A USI 


220 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. IT. 


AIC dp. 

aa Thou अक्षरम्‌ the imperishable परमस्‌ the 
Supreme Being वेदितव्यम the one thing to be known 
त्वस्‌ thou अस्य of this विश्वस्थ of (the) universe परम्‌ the 
great निधानम्‌ refuge त्वम्‌ thou gaga: the undying 
शाश्वतधमंगोप्ता guardian of the Eternal Dharma सवम 
thou सनातनः the ancient पुरुष: Purusha® मतः I 
ween. 

Thou art the Imperishable, the Supreme 
Being, the one thing to be known. Thou art 
the great Refuge of this Universe; Thou art 
the undying Guardian of the Eternal Dharma, 
Thou art the Ancient Purusha, I ween. 


अनादिमध्यांतमनंतवीर्य- | 
मनंतबाहुं शशिसूयनेत्रम il 
पश्यामि त्वां दीत्तहुताशवकतं 
स्वतेजसा विश्वमिदं तपन्तम्‌॥१६॥ 
XI. 19. 

अनादिमध्यांतम Without beginning, middle or end 
अनंतर्वीयेम infinite in power अनंतबाहूं of manifold 
arms शाशिस्ूर्यनेत्ं the sun and the moon (thy) eyes 
दीप्तहताशबजक्तं the burning fire (thy) mouth स्वततेज्ञसः 
with thy radiance gau this विश्वं universe qqeqa 
heating त्वां thee पश्यामि (I) see. 

I see Thee without beginning, middle or 
end, infinite in power, of manifold arms; the 
sun and the moon Thine eyes, the burning 
fire Thy mouth; heating the whole Universe 
with Thy radiance. 


द्यावापूधिव्योरिदमंत्र॑ हि 
* ~ e. e 
व्याप्तं त्वयेकेन दिशश्च सवाः ॥ 


18-21] ELEVENTH CHAPTER 221 


Í e oe 
SEIS SMS तद mE 
लाकञय प्रव्याथत महात्मन Noll 
AI. 420; 

महात्मन O great-souled One द्यावायृथिव्या: heaven 
and earth इद the अतरमस space betwixt एकेल alone 
aqar by thee हि indeed sappy are filled सर्वा: all far: 
quarters and qq thy spgd wonderful gag this 
उग्रम्‌ awful qu form gst having seen eaa the 
three worlds प्रव्याधितस्‌ are trembling ( with fear). 

The space betwixt heaven and earth and 
all the quarters are filled by Thee alone; 
having seen this, Thy marvellous and awful 


form, the three worlds are trembling with fear, 
O Great-souled One. 


अमी हि त्वां gta विशन्ति 
केचिद्धीता: प्रांजलयो zrumpew N 
स्वस्तात्युक्त्वा महर्षिसिद्धसंघा 
स्तुवान्त त्वां स्तुतिभिः TRAIT: ॥२१॥ 
Al- 2115 
अमी These सुरसंधा: hosts of the Devas हि verily 
eqra thee fayfeq enter केचित some भीता: in fear 
प्रांजलयः with joined palms qura extol महषिसिद्धसंघाः 
bands of great Rishis and Siddhas “स्वास्त '' May it 
be well" gfq thus उक्सा! saying पुष्कलाभिः splendid 
स्ततिभिः with hymns स्वास्‌ thee स्तुवांन्त praise. 
Verily, into Thee enter these hosts of the 
Devas; some‘ extol Thee in fear with joined 
palms ; “ May it be well!” thus saying, bands 
of Great Rishis and Siddhas praise Thee 


with splendid hymns, 2 
17 s 


222 THE VISION OF THE— . [Chaàp. Ir 


रुद्रादित्या वसवो ये च साध्या 
चिश्वेऽश्चिनौ मरुतञ्चोष्मपाञ्च ॥ 
गन्धवेयक्षासुरासे द संघा 
वीक्ष॒न्ते त्वाँ विस्मिताश्चिव सवे ॥२२॥ 
Mls, 22: 

रुद्रादिता: The Rudras and Adityas वसव: Vasus ये 
those that च and साध्याः Sádhyas विश्वे Vishve-Devas 
अश्विनी Ashvins मरतः Maruts च and उष्मपाः Ushma- 
pás*« and रांधवेयक्षासरसिद्धसंघा: hosts of Gandharvas, 
Yakshas, Asuras and Siddhas सर्वे 21 एव quite 
विस्मिताः astounded eara (at) thee च and afaeq are 
looking. 

The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, and Sadhyas, 
Vishve-Devas and Ashvins, Maruts and 
Ushmapas, hosts of Gandharvas, Yakshas, 
Asuras, and Siddhas, they are all looking at 
Thee, all quite astounded. 

L Ushmapás— he Pitris. | 
रूपं महत्ते बहुवक्रनेत्र 

महाबाहो AZALI I 
बहूदरं बहुदंष्टाकराले 
दृष्टा लोका: प्रव्याथतास्तथाहम ॥२श 
ve, ‘Bh 

महाबाहो O mighty-armed बहुवकनेत्रम with many 
mouths and eyes बहुवाहरुपादस with many arms, 
thighs and feet बहूदरस with many stomachs बहु- 
देष्टाकरालं fearful with many tusks ते thy महत 
immeasurable सुषम्‌ form दृष्टा having seen लोकाः 
worlds प्रव्याथिताः are terrified zrz I तथा so also. 

Having seen Thy immeasurable Form— 
with many mouths-and eyes, O mighty-armed, 


FOR Q5 
22-25] —UNIVERSAL FORM DY 


with many arms, thighs and feet, with many 
stomachs, and fearful with many tusks,—the 


worlds are terrified, and so am I. 


नभःस्पृशं दीप्तमनेकवशो 
व्यात्ताननं दी्तविशालनेत्रम्‌ ॥ 
apr हि त्वां प्रव्यथितान्तराव्मा 
| शति न विन्दामि शमं च विष्णो ॥२४॥ 
XI. 24. 

बिष्णो O Vishnu नभः the sky स्पृशं touching दीप्तम्‌ 
shining भ्रनेकवगीस in many a colour व्यात्ताननम्‌ with 
mouths wide open दीप्ताविशालनेचम्‌ with large fiery eyes 
स्वाम्‌ thee हि indeed ggr on seeing प्रर्याथतान्तराव्मा 
terrified at heart ( अहम I) alae patience, courage 
शमस्‌ peace *q and न not विन्दामि find. 

On seeing Thee touching the sky, shining 
in many a colour, with mouths wide open, 
with large fiery eyes, I am terrified at heart, 
and find no courage nor peace, O Vishnu. 


देष्टाकरालानि च ते मुखानि 

हट्टच कालानलसंनिभानि ॥ 
दिशो नजाने न लभे च शमे 

प्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास URW 


NM “25; 
देवेश O Lord of Devas दष्टाकशलानि fearful with 
tusks कालानलसंनिभाचि ( blazing ) like Pralaya-fires sq 


and ते thy मुखानि mouths रट्टा एव having seen दिपा: the 
four quarters q जाने I know not शमे peace न nor 
लगे do (I) find जगन्निवास O abode of the universe 
quiz have mercy. ` 


221. SRIMAD-BIAGAVAD-GITA | Chap. IE 


Having seen Thy mouths fearful with tusks, 
(blazing )like Pralaya-Fires, I know not the 
four quarters, nor do I find peace; have 
mercy, O Lord of the Devas, O Abode of the 
Universe. 

[ Pralava-Fires: The fires which consume the 
worlds at the time of the final dissolution ( pralaya) 
of the universe. 


L Eno’ ...... guarters: l cannot distinguish the 
East from the West, nor North from the South. | 


अमी च त्वां धूतराष्ट्रस्य Far: 
A fas PEG 
सवे सहेवावनिपालसंघे:॥ 
~ ON A 
HTSHT द्राश: सूतपञस्तथासा 
NN EO Of A 

सहास्पदीयराप योधमुख्ये: ॥२६॥ 
वक्राणि ते त्वरमाणा विशन्ति 

देट्राकरालानि भयानकानि N 
केचिद्विलग्ना दशनान्तरेषु 

क ~ A 0x + 
BELTS चूगितरुत्तमांगे: ॥२७॥ 
Ab 2299527. 
अवनिपालसंयः Hosts of the kings of earth सदेव with 

अमी these « and धृतराष्ट्रस्य of Dhritaráshtra सर्वे all 
gar: sons त्तथा and भीष्मः Bhishma gray: Drona आसो 
this सूतपुत्रः Sutaputra अस्मदीयेः: (with those ) of ours 
आपि also यो वयस्यैः (with) warrior chiefs सह with 
त्वरमाणा precipitately ते they देष्टाकरालानि terrible with 
tusks भयानकानि fearful to behold वक्राणि mouths 
त्वां thee विशान्ति enter केचित्‌ some qia: crushed to 
powder ganii: with (their) heads दशनान्तरेषु in the 
gaps betwixt the teeth am sticking qzxaeq are 
found. 


All these sons of Dhritarashtra, with hosts 


25-29 | ELEVENTH CHAPTER 225 


of monarchs, Bhishma, Drona, and Suta- 
putra, with the warrior chiefs of ours, 
enter precipitately into Thy mouth, terrible 
with tusks and fearful to behold. Some are 
found sticking in the interstices of Thy teeth, 
with their heads crushed to powder. 

| Sulapufra : The son of a charioteer. Karna. ] 


यथा नदीनां बहवोऽम्बुवेगाः 
समुद्रमेवाभिमुखा द्रवन्ति ॥ 
तथा तवामी नरलोकवीरा 


विशन्ति वक्ाणयभसिविञ्घलन्ति॥२वी 
NI. 28. 


यथा As नदीनां of rivers बहव: many अम्बुवेगा: water- 
currents अभिसुखा: towards grgga the ocean एव verily 
s4[eq flow तथा so अमी these नरलोकवीरा: heroes in 
the world of men ग्रनिविज्वलन्ति fiercely flaming on 
all sides qq thy qsprfàr mouths निशन्ति enter. 
Verily, as the many torrents of rivers flow 
towards the ocean, so do these heroes in the 
world of men enter Thy mouths fiercely 
flaming on all sides. 
युथा प्रदीप्तं जवलनं पतंगा 
: विशन्ति नाशाय सम्हद्धवेगा: ॥ 
तथव नाशाय विशन्ति लोका- 
स्तवापि वक्राणि HARA: ॥२६॥ 
Al. 29. 
यथा As पतंगाः moths समृद्धवेगाः with precipitous 
speed नाशाय to perish q&a blazing ज्वलनम्‌ fire 
विशान्ति rush into तथा just so समृद्धवेगाः with precipi- 
tous speed लोका: creatures afq also नाशाय to perish 
aq only तव thy वक्राणि mouths विशन्ति rush into. 


2336 THE VISION OF THE— [ Chap. IL 


As moths precipitately rush into a blazing 
fire to perish, just. so do these creatures also 
precipitately rush into Thy mouths only to 
perish, 

[28 &29.—The two similes vividly illustrate how 
the assembled warriors rush to destruction, out of 


their uncontrollable nature, with or without dis- 
crimination. | 


लेलिह्यसे ग्रसमानः समन्ता- 
लोकान्समआ्न्वदनेज्वेलद्विः ॥ 
तेजोभिरापूये जगत्समग्रं 
भासस्तचोग्राः प्रतपन्ति विष्णो ॥३०॥ 
XI. 30. 

sate: Flaming qaq: with mouths समग्रात all 
लोकान the worlds ग्रसमानः swallowing समन्तात्‌ on 
every side लेलिह्यसे thou art licking thy lips बिष्णों 
O Vishnu तव thy qur fierce भास: rays तेजोनि: with 
radiance समग्रम्‌ the whole जगत्‌ world आपूर्य filling 
भ्रतपाल्ते are burning. 

Swallowing all the worlds on every side 
with Thy flaming mouths Thou art licking 
Thy lips. Thy fierce rays filling the whole 
world with radiance, are burning, O Vishnu! 

[ Licking Thy lips: consuming entirely, enjoy- 
ing it, as it were. | 
आख्याहि मे को भवानुग्ररूपो 

नमोऽस्तु ते देववर प्रसीद ॥ 
विज्ञातुमिच्छामि भवन्तमाद्यं 
न हि प्रजानामि aa arm ॥३१॥ 
AXI. 31. 

qp mq: Fierce in form भवान thou कः who (art) 

में me आख्याहि tell ते to thee नमः salutation अस्तु be 


29-32 | —UNIVERSAL FORM 227 


देववर O Deva Supreme प्रसीद have mercy आद्यम the 
primeval one भवन्तम्‌ thee विज्ञातुस्‌ to know इच्छामि 
(I) desire हि indeed तव thy प्रवृत्ति purpose q not 
प्रजानामि (I) know. 

Tell me who Thou art, fierce in form. 
Salutation to Thee, O Deva Supreme ; have 
mercy. I desire to know Thee, O Primeval 
One. I know not indeed Thy purpose. 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 
कालोऽस्मि ARAIRE 
लोकान्समाहतुमिह TTA: ॥ 
ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्वे 
येऽवस्थिताः प्रत्यनीकेषु योधाः ॥३२॥ 
Ale 32; 

भगवान The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

ataapa World-destroying gg: mighty काल: 
time आस्मि (1) am लोकान worlds समाहतुम्‌ to infold 
इह here yqq: engaged स्वास्‌ thee zgq without आपे 
even प्रत्यनीकेषु in hostile armies ये these योधाः 
warriors अवस्थिताः arrayed सर्वे न none भविष्यन्ति 
shall live. 

" The Blessed Lord said : 

I am the mighty world-destroying Time, 
here made manifest for the purpose of in- 
folding the world. Even without thee, none 
of the warriors arrayed in the hostile armies 
shall live, 

[ Even without thee &c.—Even without thy 
instrumentality, i. e., even if thou, O Arjuna, 


wouldst not fight, the end of all these warriors is 
inevitable, because I as ihe all-destroying Time 


228 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | Chap. rr, 


have already killed them; so thy instruntentality 
in that work is insignificant. | 
तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व 
जित्वा शत्रन्भुश्व राज्यं UJET ॥ 
मयेवेते निहताः पूर्वमेव 
निमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन्‌ ॥३३॥ 
AL). 

तस्मात्‌ Therefore eqq thou उत्तिष्ट 60 arise यशः 
fame लभस्व acquire gq enemies ज्ञित्वा after con- 
quering समृद्धम्‌ the unrivalled राञ्यम्‌ dominion भुंक्ष्व 
enjoy मया by myself एव verily छते they पूर्वम already 
एव even निहता: have been slain सव्यसाचिन्‌ QO 
Savyasüchin ( त्वस्‌ thou ) निमित्तमात्रम्‌ an apparent 
cause भव be. 

Therefore do thou arise and acquire fame, 
After conquering the enemies, enjoy the 
unrivalled dominion. Verily by Myself have 
they been already slain; be thou merely an 
apparent cause, O Savyasáchin ( Arjuna.) 


| Sacrasdcatz—one who could shoot arrows even 
with his left hand. 
bE cause.—People will think thee as 
the vanquisher of thy enemies, whom even the 
Devas cannot kill, and thus thou wilt gain glory; 
but thou art only an instrument in the hand of Me, 


- 


the All-destroyer.] 
द्रोणं च भीष्मं च जयद्रथं च 

कर तथाऽन्यानपि योधवीरान्‌ ॥ 
सया हतांस्त्वं जहि मा व्यथिष्ठा 

युद्धस्व जेतासि रशे सपल्लान्‌ ॥३७॥ 


32-35] ELEVENTH CHAPTER 222 | 


XI. 34. 

etary Drona = and भौष्मं Brishma = and SUE 
jayadratha * and कणेम्‌ Karna gaf as well as ञ्रन्याद 
others योधवीरात brave warriors fq already मया bv 
me gare killed eqq. thou ज्ञाहि ९० Lill मा not ब्याथिटा: 
be distressed wiih fear रखें in baile &qara the 
enemies जेता आसि shalt conquer युध्यस्व fight. 

Drona and Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna, 
as well as other brave warriors,—these, killed 
already by Me, do thou kill, and be not 
distressed with fear. Fight, and thou shait 
conquer thy enemies in battle. 


[ Distressed with fear—of incurring sins by kill- 
ing Drona who is your Guru and Bhishma your 
grandsire, and others; and fear not of success, be- 
cause they are regarded as invincible. | 


संजय उवाच ॥ 
Sal वचने केशवस्य 
कतांजालिवेपसानः किरीदी ॥ 
ममसूछत्वा भूय CATT रुष्णं 
ANS भातभीतः प्रशस्य 3i 
Al. 35. 
संजयः Sanjaya उवाच said: 
केशवस्य Of Keshava waa that वचनम्‌ speech saf 
having heard वषान: trembling fenziet the diademed 
one कृतांजलिः with joined palms नमस्कृत्वा prostra- 
ting (himself) sita: overwhelmed with fear 
yaraq bowing down Aya again संगहदम in à 
choked voice ळृष्णम to Krishna आह addressed. 
13. 


Ks] 





230 THE VISION OF THE— [Chap 11, 


Sanjaya said : 

Having heard that speech of Keshava, the 
ciademed one { Arjuna), with joined palms, 
trembling, prostrated himself, and again 
addressed Krishna in a choked voice, bow- 
ing down, overwhelmed with fear, 

अजुन उवाच di 
FS e e 
स्थाने हृषीकेश तव प्रकीत्या 
जगत्प्रहृष्यत्यनुरज्यते चा 
रक्षांसि भीतानि feat द्रवन्ति 
सर्वे नमस्यन्ति च सिद्धसंघा:॥३६॥ 
XI. 36. 

अर्जन: Arjuna उवाच said: 

हृषीकेश O Hrishikesha तव thy प्रकीत्या in praise 
जगत्‌ the world प्रहष्यति is delighted sravss re- 
joices = and रक्तासि Kdxshasas भीतानि in fear R: 
to all quarters gqfèq fly सर्वे all सिद्धसवाः the hosts 
of Siddhas च and नमस्यन्ति bow (to thee ) स्थाने it 
is meet. 

Arjuna said: 

It is meet, O Hrishikesha, that the world is 
celighted and rejoices in Thy praise, that 
Rákshasas fly in fear to all quarters and all 
the hosts of Siddhas bow down to Thee in 
adoration, 
कस्माच्च ते न नमेरन्महात्मन्‌ 

गरीयसे बह्मणो$प्यादिकच ॥ 
अनन्त देवेश जगन्निवास 
CANAL सदसत्तत्परं यत्‌ ॥३७॥ 


35-38 | —UNIVERSAL FORM 231 


AL. 3६ 

महात्मन्‌ O Great-souled One saq O Infinite 
देबेश O Lord of the Devas जगन्निवास O Abode of 
the Universe gata: of Brahma आवि even गरीयसे 
greater आदिकन्रे the Primal Cause च and ते to thee 
कस्मात्‌ hows not qme they should bow सत्त the 
being असत the non-being परम beyond (them ) 
यत्‌ which gre the Imperishable qa that च and 
equ thou (art). 

And how should they not, 0 Great-souled 
One, bow to Thee, greater than, and the 
Primal Cause of, even Brahma, O Infinite 
being, O Lord of the Devas, O Abode of 
the Universe; Thou art the Imperishable, the 
Being and the non-Being, (as well as) That 
which is Beyond ( them ) 

[ Brahmá: the Hiranyagarbha. 

The Being aud the noa-Being, Cwc.—The Sat 
(Manifested) and the dsaf (Unmanifested ), 
which form the Upadhis (adjuncts) of the 4£sZora 
(Imperishable ); as such He is spoken of as tne 


Saf and the Asaf. In reality, the Imperishable 
transcends the Saf and the Asaf. ] 


त्वमादिदेवः पुरुषः JUM- 
स्त्वम त्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम di 
Hasta वेद्यं च परं च धाम 
त्वया ततं विश्वमनन्तरूप ॥३८॥ 
XI. 38. 
अनन्तरूष O Boundless form aa thou आदिदेवः 
the primal Deva पुराण: the ancient पुरुष: Purusha 


अस्य of this विश्वस्य of universe परम the supreme 
निधानस refuge वेत्ता the knower Hey the one 


252 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap.ri. 


thing to be known च and परं the supreme घाम goal 
zia (thou) art त्वया by thee विश्वे the universe que 
is pervaded. 

Thou art the Primal Deva, the ancient 
Purusha; Thou art the Supreme Refuge of 
this Universe, Thou art the Knower, and the 
One Thing to be known; Thou art the 
Supreme Goal. By Thee is the Universe per- 
vaded, O Boundless Form. 


वायुयेमोषश्रिवेरशाः WIR: 
प्रजापतिस्व प्रपितामहश्च ॥ 
नभो AAAS UEWSU: 


Gar भूयोऽपि नमो नमस्ते ॥३६॥ 
AI. 39. 

equ Thou (art) ary: Vayu aq: Yama अग्नि: Agni 
quur Varuna शाकः the moon प्रजापति; Prajapati 
प्रावतामहः the Great-Grandfather wand @ to thee 
WA: AA: salutation, salutation अस्तु be सरसखकृत्वः 2 
thousand times पुन: again * and सूय आपे and again 
@ to thee qq: gg: salutation, salutation. 

Thou art Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the 
moon, Prajapati,and the Great-Grandfather, 
Salutation, salutation to Thee! a thousand 
times, and again and again salutation, saluta- 
tion to Thee! 


( Vayu......d4foon: The God of wind, death, fire, 
waters, and the moon. 


The Great-Grandfaiher—The Creator even of 
Brahm, | 


हमः पुरस्तदथ पृष्ठतस्ते 
«used ते सवेत एव से है 


38-42 | ELEVENTH CHAPTER 233 


अनल्तबीयामितविक्रमस्त्वं 
of ~ as च s e 
ga HATAST तताशस सच: Neol 
XI. 40. 

सर्द 0 All ह to thee पुरस्ताल्‌ before gray and 
yga: behind नम: salutation ते to thee सवेत एव on 
every side नमः salutation अस्तु be qaqaia: infinite 
in power आमिताविक्रम: infinite in prowess eqq thou 
wa all समामोदि pervadest qe: wherefore सर्वः all 
afā thou art. 

Salutation to Thee before and to Thee 
behind, salutation to Thee on every side, O 
All! Thou, infinite in power and infinite in 
prowess, pervadest all; wherefore Thou art 
Al, 


[ On every side: As thou art present every- 
where. 
Pervadest: by Thy One Self. ] 


सखेति सत्वा सथं यदुक्तं 

हे कृष्ण हे यादव हे सखेति ॥ 
अजानता महिमान तवद 

मया प्रमादाव्यशयेन वापि ॥४१॥ 
TAAL AANA Basia 

विदहारशय्यासनभोजनेषु ॥ 
एकोष्यवाप्यच्णुत aang 


तत्न्लामये त्वामहमप्रमेयम्‌ ॥४२॥ 
AX]. 41, 42. 
aq Thy महिमानम्‌ greatness gaq this «p and 
ऋजानता unconscious मया by me yatera from 
carelessness qupapq due to love qr or आपि merely 


234 THE VISION OF THE— . [ Chap. zr. 


aar friend इति as मत्वा regarding € कृष्णा O Krishna 
हैं यादव O Yádava हे सखे O friend इत्ति as Te WW 
presumptuously eg whatever उत्तम्‌ said अच्युत O 
Achyuta विहारशण्यासनभोजनेषु while walking, re- 
posing, sitting, or at meals एक: when alone अधवा 
Or qaqaqa in co. any अवहासार्थम्‌ for the sake of 
fun sq in whatever wav असत्कृत: unhonoured शस 
thou art अहम 1 श्र गायम्‌ immeasurable qra, thee सतः 
that granà (1) implore to forgive. 


Whatever I have presumptuously said 
from carelessness or love, addressing Thee as, 
“QO Krishna, O  Yádava, O friend," regard- 
ing Thee merely asa friend, unconscious of 


_ this Thy ereatness—in whatever way I may 


have been disrespectful to Thee in fun, 
while walking, reposing, sitting, or at meals, 


when alone (with Thee), O Achyuta, or in 


company—I implore Thee, Immeasurable 
One, to forgive all this, 
{ Love: Confidence born of affection. 
47 company : in the presence of others. ] 
पितासि लोकस्य चराचरस्य 
त्वमस्य घूज्यश्च गुरु।रीयान di i 
न त्वत्समो$स्त्यक्‍््याधिकः कुतोऽन्यो 
लोकत्रये५प्यप्रतिमप्रभाव: ॥४३॥ 
XI. 43. 
अशतिममनाव: Of power incomparable स्क 
thou चराचरस्य of the moving and unmoving 
नरकस्य of the world पिता father असि (thou) art 


ysa: the object of worship अस्य its * and गुरू- 
aefera greater than the great, लोकत्रये in the three 


42-44] —UNIVERSAL FORM 235 


worlds ऋषि even स्वत्समः equal to thee x none 
खाहि is sqq: surpassing अन्य any other ges: 
whence. 

Thou art the Father of the world, moving 
and unmoving; the object of its worship; 
greater than the great. None there exists 
whois equal to Thee in the three worlds: 
who then can excel Thee, O Thou of power 
incomparable ? 


[ Moue......f0 Z'Àez— There cannot be two or more 
Ishvaras; if there were, the world could not get 
on as it does. When one Ishvara desires to create, 
another may desire to destroy. Who knows tha: 
all the different Ishvaras would be of ene mind, as 
they would all be iadependent of each other. | 


ARAT प्रशवाय कार्य 
TACT त्वामहमीशमीड्यम्‌ ॥ 
पितेव घुत्रस्व wey सख्युः 
fira: म्रियायाइसि देव सोहुम ॥४४॥ 
AT. 44. 

देव Lord स्तस्मात्‌ so wea I कायम्‌ (my) body 
अखिषाय having prostrated प्रणम्य saluting fex 
adorable स्वास्‌ thee प्रसाद crave forgiveness gae of 
the son, पिता (a) father इव as gue: of a dear friend 
सखा a friend इव as [प्रियायाः of one's love प्रियः a 
beloved one इव as urgX to forgive ईसि thou 
shouldst. 

So prostrating my body in adoration, I 
crave Thy forgiveness, Lord adorable. As a 
father forgiveth his son, a friend a dear friend, 
a beloved one his love, even so shouldst Thou 
forgive me, O Deva. 


iY 


36 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 7३० 


FETUS हषिसोऽस्मि EET 
भयेन च भव्यथिते सतो मे ॥ 
तदेव मे दर्शय देव रूपं 
प्रसाद TAT जगान्नेवास ॥४४॥ 
XI, 45. 

देव O Deva अहष्पूवस what was never seen be- 
"ore दृष्टा having seen हाषितः overjoyed sup 7 
am भयेन with terror sp vei में my मनः mind प्रच्शयितम 
is distracted तत्‌ that wae form एवं only में me 
दर्शय show देवेश O Lord of Devas aaar O Abode 
of the universe प्रसीद have mercy. 

Overjoyed am I to have seen what I saw 
never before; yet my mind is distracted with 
terror. Show me, O Deva, only that Form 
of Thine. Have mercy, O Lord of Devas, 
O Abode of the Universe. 


किरीटिनं गदिनं चक्रहस्त- 
£^. 1 (o ei NY 
Rta g द्रटमइ तथव ॥ 
e, A w 
तेनेव रूपेश qu 
gaaat भव चिश्वसूर्ते que 
XL 46. 
हं l तथा एवं as before त्वाम thee fant@ay dig- 
demed गदिनम्‌ bearing a mace चक्रहस्तम a discus 
in the hand द्रष्टम्‌ to see gA 1 desire qzu- 
बाहो O (thou) of thousand arms विश्वयूर्ते of uni- 
versal form तेनेव that same चतुर्भुजेन four-armed 
रूपेण form wq assume. 
Diademed, bearing a mace and a discus, 
Thee I desire to see as before. Assume that 


r 


45-48 | ELEVENTH CHAPTER 237 


same four-armed Form, O Thou of thousand 
arms, of Universal Form. 
शीभगवाजुवाच di 
~ De a 
मया असन्नन तवाऊुनद 
ey " ^ शु n a aT 
रूप पर दाशतमात्मयागात्‌ ॥ 
तेजे w e FN oT a PS 
ANAT [वश्वसनन्वलाच 
X >» द 
यन्म त्वदन्यन न WUYuu rasi 
XI 47. 

sirara The Blessed Lord gare said : 

अजुन O Arjuna gaña graciously मया by me 
आत्मयोगात्‌ by my own Yoga power तव to thee ge 
this तेजोमयस्‌ resplendent अनन्तस infinite SAA 
primeval मे of mine gga supreme farga universal 
रूपम form दर्शितस्‌ has been shown ge which aaya 
by any other than thyself q not रष्टपूवेस hath been 
seen before. 

The Blessed Lord said : 

Graciously have I shown to thee, O Arjuna, 
this Form Supreme, by My own Yoga 
power, this primeval, infinite, universal Form 
of Mine, resplendent, which hath not been 
seen before thee bv anyone else. 


- A Tt A 
न वेदयज्ञाध्ययनेन दान- 
má f wo A 
ने च क्रियाभिन aAa: N 
एवंरूपः शक्य अहं eg 
ZE त्वदन्येन कुरुप्रवीर ues 
XI. 48. 
कुरुपवीर O great hero of the Kurus ने neither 
वेदयज्ञाघ्ययने: by the study of the Veda and of Yajna 


238 THE VISION OF THE— . [Chap. 11. 


न nor aft: by gifts q च nor क्रियाभिः by rituals न 
nor उमे: by severe eG: (by) austerities एबं such 
रूप: form ggg l ल्वदन्यन to any other than thee 
gets in the world of men gaa शक्य: am I visible. 

Neither by the study of the Veda and of 
Yajna, nor by gifts, nor by rituals, nor by 
severe austerities, am I in such Form visible, 
n tue worid of men, to any other than thee, 
O great hero of the Kurus. 
मा ते व्यथामा च विसूढभावो 

इष्टा रूपं घोरमीहङ्ममेदम्‌ ॥ 
व्यपेतभीः प्रीतमनाः पुनस्त्वं 
तदेव मे रूपमिदं प्रपश्य ॥४६॥ 
XI. 49. 

ईइक So घोरम terrible मम of mine इदम्‌ this gga 
form दृष्टा having seen af not thine ब्यथा fear 
डिझूडभावः bewildered state (See be) मा च nor 
zaga]: with (thv) fears dispelled प्रीतमनाः with 
vtaddened heart च and ga: again aa thou में of 
une तत्‌ इदं this (former) रूपम एव form प्रपश्य see 


prow), 


zat 


De uot afraid nor bewildered, having be- 
heid this Form of Mine, so terrific. With 
thv fears dispelled and with gladdened heart, 
now see again this ( former) Form of Mine, 

संजय उवाच ॥ 
Taga वाखुदेवस्तथोदत्वा 
स्वर्क रूपं दरांयामास भूयः: ॥ 
आश्वासयामास च भीतमेनं 
भूत्वा पुनः सोम्यदपुर्मेहात्मा ॥५०॥ 


48-52] —UNIVERSAL FORM 239 


XI. 5o. 

संजयः Sanjaya उवाच said : 

वाञ्चुदेदः Vasudeva अज्जुनम to Arjuna ति thus 
उक्त्वा having spoken भूयः again तथा so स्वकम his 
own wy form दशयामास showed महात्मा the great- 
souled one सौम्यवपुः (his) gentle form भूत्वा assum- 
ing पुनः again भातम who was terrified एनम्‌ him 
आम्वासयामास pacified च and. 

Sanjaya said : 

So Vásudeva, having thus spoken to Arjuna, 
showed again His own Form, and the Great- 
souled One, assuming His gentle Form, 
pacified him who was terrified. 

अज्जुन उवाच ॥ 
eee mgt रूपं तव uisi जनादन ॥ 
इदानीर्मास्म GTA: सचता: प्रकृति गत: ॥५१॥ 
Alo CREE. 

अर्जनः Arjuna उवाच said : 

जनादन O Jauárdana qw thy इदम this सौम्यम्‌ 
gentle HIIS human wy form Ter having seen 
इदानीम्‌ now अहे I सचता: with thoughts qa: com- 
posed f I am प्रकरृतिम (my) nature शतः re- 
covered. b 

Arjuna said : 

Having seen this Thy gentle human form 
O Janárdana, my thoughts are now com- 
posed and I have recovered myself. 

श्रीभगवाजुवाच ॥ 
सुदुर्दशेमिदं wd दष्टवानासि यन्मम ॥ 
देवा अप्यस्य रूपस्य नित्य, दशनकांचिण:ः dual 


240 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | Chap. IE, 


XI. 52. 

sonata The Blessed Lord gare said: 

मस Mine gaa this qz very hard to see 
यत्‌ which छूपम 107m gzarp« seen sfà thou hast देवाः 
Devas zd rane आर्य of this रूणस्य (of) form निलयम्‌ 
ever esq miram: long to behold. 

The Blessed Lord said 

Very hard indeed it is to see this Form 
of Mine which thou hast seen, Even the 
Devas ever long to behold this Form. 


~ ~ 


देने तपसा न दानेन न चेज्यया | 
शकय एर्ववियों FE दृष्वार्वास मां यथा ॥९३॥ 
En 

यथा As माम me दृष्वाद Bra (thou) hast seen wafay: 
like this अहम्‌ | न neither X4 by the Vedas न nor 


agar by austerity q nor दानिन by gifts q nor gSa 
by sacrifice gE« to be seen शक्‍य (am) possible. 


vA 


Neither by the Vedas nor by austerity, 
nor by gifts, nor by Sacrifice can I be seen 
as thou hast seen Me. 


WHA त्वनन्यया WET REAA SA ॥ 
जञातुं FE च dea प्रवेष्टुं च परन्तप ॥५४॥ 
Al. 54. 
qaq O scorcher of foes अजुन () Arjuna 
अनन्यया by single weer (by) devotion तु but एवंविधम 
in this form az I तत्त्वत in reality ज्ञात to be त. 


द्ृष्टुस्‌ (० be seen yaga to be entered into * and 
also शक्यः (am) possible. 


52-55] ELEVENTH CHAPTER 241 


But by single devotion I may in this 
Form be known, O Arjuna, and seen in 
reality, and also entered into, O scorcher 
of foes. 


[ Single devotion: that devotion which never 
seeks any other object but the Lord alone, and 
consequently cognises no other object but the 
Lord. ] 


e > ot 
HAHAH AIA AW: संगर्चाजतः॥ 

A e — 

निर्चेरः सवभूतेषु यः स मामेति पाण्डव ॥५५॥ 
Xl. 55. 

वागडव O Pandava थ: who RRAGA does work ior 
me मवपरमः has me for his goal 487g: is devoted to 
me झंगवर्जितः is freed from attachment सर्व शतेषु to- 
wards all creatures faat: bearing no enmity = and 
स: he मां me ufq enters into. 

He who does work for Me alone and has 
Me for his goal, is devoted to Me, is freed 
from attachment, and bears enmity towards 
no creature—-he entereth into Me, O Pándava. 

[ Does work for ihe alone: Serves Me alone in all 
forms and mauner of ways, with his whole heart 
and soul, and thus does not become attached 
to them. 

One whose devotion takes the forms as described 
in this sloka, can only know and realise Him as 
He is in reality, and subsequently become one 
with Him. ] 

~ £n. Sa क 

डात चश्चरुपदशन नाम एकादशा $व्याय: ॥ 

The end of the eleventh chapter designated, 
THE VISION OF THE UNIVERSAL FORM, 


. क 
a 0 oc 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


ll द्वादशो ऽध्यायः ॥ 
TWELFTH CHAPTER 


अजुन उवाच N 
एवे सततयुक्ता ये भक्तास्त्वां पयुपासते ॥ 
ये चाप्यक्षरमव्यक ते! के योगवित्तमाः Ue 
XIIL 1, 

HA: Arjuna उवाच said: 

एवं thus सततयुक्ताः ever-steadfast ये those भक्ता! 
devotees त्वास्‌ thee पर्युपासते worship ये those = and 
gig also yek the unmanifested अक्षरम the Im- 
perishable तेषाम्‌ of them के which योगवित्तमाः better 
versed in Yoga. 

Arjuna said : 

Those devotees who, ever-steadfast, thus 
worship Thee, and those also who worship 
the Imperishable, the Unmanifested,—wlyich 
of them are better versed in Yoga? 


| Thus: as declared in the last preceding verse 
(Xi. 55 ). 

Lhe Unmanifested—Avyaktam—t. e. That which 
is incomprehensible to the senses, as devoid of 
all Upddhis. | 


श्रीभगवानुवाच di 
मय्यावेश्य मनो ये मां नित्ययु का उपासते ॥ 
श्रद्धया परयोपेतास्ते मे युक्ततमा AAT: ॥२॥ 


1-4] THE WAY OF DEVOTION 213 


XII 2. 

afrrarara The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

मुखि On me मनः: mind saga fixing नित्यवक्ता: 
ever-steadfast परया Supreme yga with Shraddhá& 
उपेताः endowed ये who माम्‌ me उपासते worship + 
those युक्ततमाः the best versed in Yoga मे my मताः 
are in (my) opinion. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

Those who, fixing cheir mind on Me, wor- 
ship Me, ever-steadfast, and endowed with 
Supreme Shraddha, they in My opinion are 
the best versed in Yoga. 


ये त्वच्षरमनिर्देश्यमन्यक्तं पर्युपासते ॥ 
सवेत्रगमचिन्त्यं च कूटस्थमचलं TIT ॥३॥ 
संनियम्येन्द्रियध्रामं सर्वत्र समजुद्धयः ॥ 
ते प्राश्चवन्ति मामेव सवेभूतहिते रताः ॥४॥ 
Mlle, 35 Ae 
सर्वच Everywhere समबुद्धयः even-minded ये who g but 
af also इन्द्रियप्रामम्‌ the aggregate of the senses [नियम्य 


y 


having subdued अनिर्देश्यम the Indefinable अ्रव्यक्तम 
the Unmanifested सर्वत्रगं the Omnipresent रिन्त 
the Unthinkable geez i.e Unchangeable अचल the 
Immovable gf the Eternal H the Impesishable 
पर्युपासते worship सर्वभूतहिते in the welfare of all 
beings इताः engaged @ they माम्‌ myself एव only 
प्रामवन्ति ( they ) reach, 

But those also, who worship the Imperish- 
able, the Indefinable, the Unmanifested, the 
Omnipresent, the Unthinkable, the Unchange- 


C44 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 12, 


sie, the Immovable, the Eternal,—having 
subdued ail the senses, even-minded every- 


aged in the welfare of all beings, — 


Cr 

D 
eriy, they reach only Myself. 
_Parokip—Cpdshani,—is, approaching the object 
of worship bv war of meditating on iL, in accordance 
"ih the teachings of the Shastras and the Guru, 
anc Gwelung steadily in the current of one 

fat, as Continuous as a thread of oil poured 


Cnckiugerile—Rutastha: liz, remaining like a 
mass. He who is seated in Maya as its Witness.] 
e क, oN TOM, > FRR - 

35 ञवकतरस्तवासव्यक्तासक्तवेतसाम i 
च ~ € » & देह [ams he 
ऋव्यच्ता हि Wass देइ वद्विरवाप्यते dull 
XII. 5. 
लेघाम OF those अव्यक्तादक्तचेवसाम whose mind is 
set on the unmanifested अधिकतर: greater (is) Sau: 
trcuole f£ for &zafg: for the embodied अव्यक्ता the 


ऋवाऱ्यते is reached. 

Greater is their trouble whose minds are set 
vr the Unmanifested; for the goal of the 
CUnmanifested is very hard for the embodied 
to reach. - 
| fis embodied—Those who are attached to, or 


Ld 


have identified themselves with, their bodies. 

No comparison between the worshippers of the 
quaiided and unqualified Brahman is meant here— 
since by ihe context, both reach the same goal. 
The path of the qualified Brahman is described as 
superior only because it is easier. The path of the 
unyualified Brahman is harder, because of the 
necessity of having to abandon all attachment to 
the body, from the very beginning of their practice. | 


4-8 ] THE WAY OF DEVOTION 245 


ये त सवोणि कमोणि मयि संन्यस्य मत्पराः ॥ 

अनन्येनेव योगेन at ध्यायन्त उपासते NEN 

तेषामहं AFCA सृत्युसंसारस्टागरात्‌ ॥ 

सवामि न चिरात्पाथ मय्याचेशितचेतसास ॥७॥ 
ATL. 

*pWhozr but सर्वाणि all want actions मयि in 
me aep resigning gaq: regarding me as the 
Supreme Goal garq with single-minded ara 
(with) Yoga एव verily ara me ब्यायन्तः meditating 
उपासते worship पाये son of Prithà we I मयि on 
me आेशितचितसास of those whose mind is set त्तेषान 
for them सृत्युसेसारसागरात् out of the ocean of the 
mortal Samsâra x aqa ere long agal the 
saviour waa I become. 

But these who worship Me, resigning all 
actions in Me, regarding Me as the Supreme 
(Goal, meditating on Me with single-minded 
Yoga;—for these whose mind is set on Me, 
verily, I become ere long, O son of Prithá, 
the Saviour out of the ocean of the mortal 
Samsara. 


(ळकर Samsdra: The round of birth and 
death. ] 


मय्येव मन ora सयि बुद्धि निवेशय ॥ 
निवसिष्यसि मय्येव अत ऊध्वे न संशय: dici 
XII. 8. 

मयि On me mq only aq: (thy) mind आधत्स्व fix 
ara in me बुद्धि (thy) intellect निवेशय place wa: 
meq hereafter मयि in me एव alone निवासिष्यासि thou 
Shalt live q no संशयः doubt. 

19 


946  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 12. 


Fix thy mind on Me only, place thy 
intellect in Me: thou shalt no doubt live in 
Me hereafter. 

[ Mind—manas: purpose and thought. 


Intellect—the faculty which resolves and deter- 
mines. 


Live in Me—as My Sek. | 


अथ fast समाधातुं न शक्तोषि मयि farta i 
अभ्यासयोगेन ततो ATARI बनंजय ॥६॥ 
ATO: 

qana O Dhananjaya अथ if मयि on me चित्तं 
(thy) mind स्थिरम्‌ steadily समाधालुं to fix न शक्तोषि 
(thou ) art unable तत; then ग्रभ्यासयोगेन by Abhyasa- 
Yoga माम्‌ me ग्राप्तुम्‌ to reach इच्छ do (thou) seek. 

If thou art unable to fix thy mind steadily 
on Me, then by Abhy&sa-Yoga do thou seek 
to reach Me, O Dhananjaya. 


[ AóAyása-Foga : the practice of repeatedly with- 
drawing the mind from the objects to which it 
wanders, and trying to fix it on one thing. | 


ग्रभ्यासे$प्यसमर्थार्भस मत्कमपरमो भव N 
मदर्थमपि कमोशि कुर्वन्सिड्धिमवाप्स्यसि ॥१०॥ 
XII. ro. 

अभ्यासे (In) Abhyasa आवि also असमर्थः unable to 
practise असि if thou art मत्कर्मपरमः intent on doing 
actions for my sake भव be thou Hay for my sake 
कर्माणि actions gra by doing sm even सिद्धिस्‌ per- 


fection गअ्रवाप्स्यसि thou sha ile 
If also thou art unable to’ ractise Abhyasa, 


be thou intent on doing actions for My sake, 


8-12] THE WAY OF DEVOTION 247 


Even by doing actions for My sake, thou shalt 
attain perfection 


अथेतदप्यशक्तोऽसि कतु मद्योगमाशित: ॥ 


सचकमफलत्यारग तत: कुरु यंतात्मवान्‌ ॥१९॥ 
XII. 11 


अथ lf एतद्‌ this कत to do अशक्तः unable असि 
thou art qq: then मद्योगम्‌ refuge in me Ifa: 
taking qarata self-controlled सर्वेकमेफलत्यागस the 
renunciation of fruit of all action कुरू do. 


If thou art unable to do even this, then 
taking refuge in Me, and self-controlled, 
abandon the fruit of all action. 


[In the preceding slokas,—first, the concentration 
of the mind on the Lord is enjoined; in case of 
inability to do that, Abhyása-Yoga is advised 
if one finds that to be too hard, the performance 
of actions for the sake of the Lord alone, has been 
taught. Those who cannot do this even, who want to 
do things impelled by personal or other desires, 
are directed to give up the fruits of those actions 
to the Lord—i.e., not to anticipate, dwell, or 
build on, or care for, the results, knowing them to 
be dependent upon the Lord. Those who cannot 
control their desire for work are taught to practise 
indifference to the effects thereof. | 


Bay हि क्षानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाड्यानं विशिष्यत |i 
ध्यानात्कमेफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम lE 
XII. 12. 

अभ्यासात्‌ Than (blind) Abhydsa graa knowl- 
edge fe indeed Sra: better ज्ञानाद्‌ than (mere) 
knowledge व्यानम्‌ meditation (with knowledge y 
विशिष्यते is more esteemed ध्यानात than meditation 
करमेफलताग the renunciation of the fruits of actions 


948  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 12. 


त्यागाद्‌ from renunciation अनन्तरस्‌ immediately 
qria: peace ( भवाति follows ). 

Better indeed is knowledge than ( blind 5 
Abhyása; meditation ( with knowledge) is 
more esteemed than ( mere ) knowledge ; than 
meditation the renunciation of the fruits of 
actions ; peace immediately follows renuncia- 
tion. 

[Renunciation of the fruit of all action, as a 
means to the attainment of Bliss, is merely extolled 
here, by the declaration of the superiority of one 
over another. Wherefore? Because it constitutes. 
a common factor which immediately . precedes 
Peace, both in the case of the man of wisdom who 
is steadily engaged in devout contemplation, and 
also of the ignorant one who, unable to tread 
the paths taught before, takes it up as the easiest 
means to Bliss. ] 


HAM सर्वेभूतानां AA करुश एच ख ॥ 
निममो निरहंकारः समदुःखसुखः चमी ॥१३॥ 
सन्तुष्टः सततं योगी यतात्मा इढनिश्चयः ॥ 
मय्यर्पिंतमनोबुद्धियो मे भक्त: स मे प्रिय; ॥१७॥ 
AII. 13, 14. 

aiarra Of (to)all creatures syger free from 
hatred or malevolence मैत्रः friendly करूण: m- 
passionate *w and एवं even निर्मम: who. is free from 
the idea of mineness निरहेकार: free from egoism, 
from the notion of ‘1’ समदुःखसुखः even-minded in 
pain and pleasure eft forbearing सततत ever 
age: content योगी steady in contemplation sre 
self-controlled हृढनिश्वयं: possessed of firm conviction 
मयि on me अर्पितमनोबुद्धिः with mind -and intellect 
fixed zt: who मडूक्तः devoted to me @: he मे to me 
प्रिय; (is) dear, . 


12-16] THE WAY OF DEVOTION °" 249 


He who hates no creature, and is friendly 
and compassionate towards all,who is free 
from the feelings of me and mine, even- 
minded in pain and pleasure, and forbearing, 
ever content' and steady in meditation, self- 
controlled, possessed of firm conviction, with 
mind and intellect fixed on Me,—he who 
is thus devoted to Me, is dear to Me, 


यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्षोद्विजते च य:॥ 
दवोमषेभयोद्वेगेसुक्तो यः स च मे प्रिय: ॥१५९॥ 
XII. 15. 

यस्मात From (by) whom mm: the world न not 
sfüstq is agitated, afflicted यः who च and लोकात 
from (by) the world न not उद्दिजते is agitated यः 
who sr and रषांम्षभयाहेशेः by (from) joy, envy, fear 
and anxiety ap: freed सः he मे to me प्रिय: (is) dear. 

He by whom the world is not agitated and 
who cannot be agitated by the world, freed from 
joy, envy, fear and anxiety,—he is dear to Me. 


aag: शुचिदेक्ष उदासीनो गतव्यथः ॥ 
सवोरम्मपरित्यागी यो aw: स मे प्रियः ॥१३॥ 

XII. 16. 

असपेक्ष: (Who is) free from dependence gf: 
who is pure दक्षः prompt उदासीनः unconcerned 
गतष्यथ: untroubled सर्वारम्भवरियागी renouncing every 
undertaking यः who Agmm: devoted to Me a: heg 
to me प्रियः (is) dear. 

He whois free from dependence, who is 
pure, prompt, unconcerned, untroubled, re- 
nouncing every undertaking,—he who is thus 
devoted to Me, is dear to Me. 


250  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA _ [ Chap. 12. 


Free from dependence—to the body, the senses, 
the sense-objects, and their mutual connections. 

Prompt: able to decide rightly and immediately 
in matters demanding prompt action. 

Every undertaking—calculated to secure objects 
of desire, whether of this world or of the next.] 


~ ex ~ c ~ e + e 
या न EID न EDS न शाचात न कात्तात d 
शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान्यः स मे प्रिय: dsl 
NIL. 17. 

यः Who s neither हृष्यति rejoices न nor WE hates 
न nor शोचति grieves न nor Hata desires WITI- 
परित्यागी renouncing good and evil यः who भक्तिमान्‌ 
full of devotion स; he मे to me प्रिय: (is) dear. 

He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor 
grieves, nor desires, renouncing good and 
evil,——he who is full of devotion, is dear 
to Me. 


| Hares: Frets at receiving anything undesirable. 
Grieves—at parting with a beloved object. 
Desires—the unattained.] 


^ ` ~ 

सम: शत्रों च मित्रे च तथा मानापमानयो: N 
शीतोष्णखुखद:खेषु सम: संगविवजित: Nes 
तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिर्मीनी सन्तुष्टो येनकेनचित्‌॥ . 

m~ m~ a~ c NN क 
अनिकेतः स्थिरमतिभक्तिमान्मे प्रियो नरः ॥१६॥ 

XIIL. 18, 10. 

wat To foe मित्रे to friend च and तथा also s and 
मानापमानयोः in honour and dishonour समः (who 
is) the same शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु in cold and heat, 
in pleasure and pain सम: the same संगविर्वानितः 
free from attachment तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिः to whom censure 
and praise are equal मौनी who is silent येनकेनचित्‌ 
with anything संतुष्ट: content अनिकेत: homeless 


16-20 ] THE WAY OF DEVOTION PATI 


imaia: steady-minded wikara full of devotion 
नर: (that) man ¥ to me प्रय: (is) dear. 

He who is the same to friend and foe, and 
also in honour and dishonour: the same in 
heat and cold, in pleasure and pain; free 
from attachment, to whom censure and praise 
are equal; who is silent, content with any- 
thing, homeless, steady-minded, full of devo- 
tion ;—that man is dear to Me. 

[ Content with anything, homeless: content with 
the bare means of bodily sustenance. Says the 
Mahabharata, -— 

यनकनव्चिदाच्छत्लो थेमके्नाचिदाश्रितः । 
यत्र RATTAN Aes बाहमणाविदू' d 

** Who is clad with anything, who is fed on 
any food, who lies down anywhere, him the Gods 
call a Brahman.” Shanti Parva. ] 


ये लु read यथोक्तं पयुपासते N 
AAA मत्परमा भक्तास्ते$तीव मे TAT: Roll 
XIL 20. 

ये Who g indeed. arna as declared ( above ) 
ee this wage Immortal Dharma पर्युपासत follow 
sgggtat: endued with Shraddhà seqrar regarding 
rie as the Supreme Goal भाः devoted ते they 
arara exceedingly म to me प्रियः (are) dear. 

And they who follow this Immortal Dharma, 
as described above, endued with Shraddiia, 
regarding Me as the Supreme Goal, and 
clevoted,-—they are exccedingly dear to Me, 

इति भक्तियोगोनाम ZTRSISUUTT: li 

The end of the twelfth chapter designated, 

THE Way OF DEVOTION, 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ अयोदशोऽध्यायः ॥ 
THIRTEENTH CHAPTER 


अञ्जन FITE 
प्रकृति पुरुषं चेव क्षेत्रं चेजशमेव च । 
एतद्वोदेतामिच्छामि ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं च केशव ॥ 

अर्जुनः Arjuna उवाच said : 

केशव O Keshava gata the Prakriti gag the 
Purusha च and एव also &rq Kshetra क्षेत्रज्ञ the 
knower of the Kshetra = and एव also ज्ञानें 
knowledge a what ought to be known @ and एतत्‌ 
this वेदितुं to know इच्छामि (1) desire. 

Arjuna said : 

Prakriti and Purusha, also the Kshetra and 
the Knower of the Kshetra, knowledge, and 
that which ought to be known—these, O 
Keshava, I desire to learn. 

| This verse is omitted in many editions. ] : 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 
इदं शरीरं कोन्तेय क्षेत्रमित्यभिधीयते ॥ 
एतद्यो चेक्ति तं प्राहः क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विदः ॥१॥ 
XIII. 1. 
श्रीभगवान The Blessed Lord उवाच said : 


कौन्तेय O son of Kunti इदम्‌ this शरीरम्‌ body | 
Jaa Kshetra इति thus अ्रनिधीयते is called a: who 


1-3] THIRTEENTH CHAPTER 253 


wag धऽ वेत्ति knows qfge: who know of them तक 
him ज्ञेत्रज्ञ: the knower of the Kshetra इलि as sm 
they call. 

The Blessed Lord said : 

This body, O son of Kunti, is called 
Kshetra, and he who knows it is called 
Kshetrajna by those who know of them 
( Kshetra and Kshetrajna ) 


[ Kshetra ; literally, field; the body is so called 


because the fruits of action are reaped in it as 
in a field. ] 


Jaa चापि मां विद्धि सवेक्षत्रेषु भारत ॥ 
च्चेतरत्षेत्रज्ञयोज्ञोनं यत्तज्ज्ञानं मतं मम HRW 
XII 2. 

भारत O Descendant of Bharata सर्वेक्षेत्रेषु 0 all 
Kshetras wq also माम्‌ me च and क्षेत्रज्ञम्‌ the 
Kshetrajna तद्धि do thou know spere of 
Kshetra and Kshetrajna यत which ज्ञानं knowledge 
aa that ज्ञानम (is) knowledge मम by me qm is 
considered to be. 

Me do thou also know, O descendant of 
Bharata, to be the Kshetrajna in all Kshetras. 
The knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna 
is considered by Me to be Zhe knowledge. 


तत्त्तेत्रे यञ्च ATH च यद्धिकारि यतश्च यत ॥ 


सच यो यत्प्रभावश्च तत्समासेन मे ur ॥३॥ 
2५111. 3. 
तत्‌ The @aa Kshetra अत्‌ what (is) = and 
"e what its properties ऋ and eaaet what its 
modifications wa: from what (causes) & and ap 


what ( effects arise ) सः he (is) wand य: who sg 


291i THE ‘DISCRIMINATION OF THE— 


what प्रभाव: (His) powers च and qa that समासेन 
in brief म from me yg hear. 

What the Kshetra is, whatits properties are, 
what are its modifications, what effects arise 
from what causes,and also who He is and what 
are His powers, that hear from Me in brief. 


| That: the true nature of Kshetra and Kshetrajna 
in all these specific aspects. | 


आषिभिवेहुधा गीतं छन्दोभिविविधेः पृथक ॥ 
्रह्मसूत्रपदेश्चैव हेतुमद्भि्विनिश्चितेः ॥४॥ 
ND 4. 

ऋषिभिः By Rishis विविधैः various छन्दोभिः in 
chants पृथक्‌ distinctive बहुधा in many ways गीतम्‌ 
has been sung विनिश्चितैः convincing quta: full of 
reasoning agaaqè: in phrases indicative of 
Brahman @ and हव also. 

( This truth) has been sung by Rishis in 
many ways,in various distinctive chants, in 
passages indicative of Brahman, full of reason- 
ing, and convincing. 


महाभूतान्यहंकारो बुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव च ॥ 
इन्द्रियाणि दशकं च पञ्च चेन्द्रियगोचराः ॥५॥, 
इच्छा देषः सुखं दुःखं संघातश्चेतना ut: N 
Secus समासेन सविकारमुदाहृतम्‌ ॥६॥ 
SA. इ. 5. 

महाभूतानि The great Elements अहंकार: egoism बुद्धि: 
intellect अव्यक्त the unmanifested { Mula Prakriti} 
च्च and gq also दश ten इन्द्रियाणि the senses एकम्‌ 
the one ( mind ) = and qs five इन्द्रियगोचराः objects 
of sense इच्छा desire gq: hatred झुखम pleasure 


3-7] —KSHETRA & THE KSHETRAJNA 255 


दुःखम्‌ pain संघातः the aggregate, the body Waar 
intelligence धतिः fortitude waa the सविकारम्‌ with 
its modifications Waa Kshetra समासेन briefly 
उदाहृतम्‌ has been (thus) described. 


The great Elements, Egoism, Intellect, and 
also the Unmanifested ( Mula Prakriti), the 
ten senses and the one ( mind), and the five 
objects of sense ; desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, 
the body, intelligence, fortitude,—the Kshetra 
has been thus briefly described with its 
modifications. | 


| The Sankhyas speak of those mentioned in 
the fifth Sloka as the  twenty-tour Tattvas or 
Principles. 

The great Elements—Mahdbnutas—pervade all 
Vikáras, all modifications of matter. 

Aggregate—Samghdta: combination of the body 
and the senses. 

Desire and other qualities which the Vaiseshikas 
speak of as inherent attributes of the Atman, are 
spoken of in the sixth sloka as merely the attributes 
of Kshetra, and not the attributes of Kshetrajna. 
Desire and other qualities mentioned here, stand 
for all the qualities of the Antah-Kkarana or inner 
sense,—as mere mental states. Each of them, being 
knowable, is Kshetra. 

» The Kshetra, of which the various modifications 
in their totality, spoken of as “this body" in 
the first Sloka, has been here dwelt upon in all its 
different forms, from ‘The great Elements’ ६0 
‘fortitude.’ ] 


अमानित्वमर्दभित्वमहिसा ज्ञान्तिराजवम ॥ 
^ > A e A e 0 
आचार्योपासनं शोचे स्थेयेमात्मविनिश्नह: ॥७॥ 
AAMT. 9 
अमानित्वस Humility अदेभित्य॑ unpretentiousness 
अहिसा non-injuriousness क्षान्तिः forbearance MIRAX 


$56 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 13, 


uprightness ग्राचायोपासनस service of the teacher 
प्रोचम purity स्थेयेम steadiness आत्मविनिग्रहः self- 
control. 

Humility, unpretentiousness, non-injurious- 
ness, forbearance, uprightness, service of 
the teacher, purity, steadiness, self-control ; 


| Acrhárya—one who teaches the means of attain- 
ing Moksha. 

Purify—external and internal. The former 
consists in washing away the dirt from the body 
bs means of water &c., and the latter—the inner 
purity of mind—consists in the removal from it of 
tie dirt of attachment and other passions, by the 
recognition of evil in all objects of sense. ] 


इन्द्रियार्थबु वेराग्यमनहंकार एव च ॥ 
जन्मसृत्युजराव्याधिदुःखदोषानुदशनम्‌ ॥८॥ 
XIII. 8. 

इन्द्रियार्थेघु Of sense-objects Jarra renuncia- 
tion अनईकार: absence of egoism एव also च and 
जअन्‍्मसत्युजराव्याधिदु खदोषानुदशनम्‌ reflection on the 
evils of birth, death, old age. sickness and pain. 

Ihe renunciation of sense-objects, and also 
absence of egoism; reflection on the evils 
of birth, death, old age, sickness and pain ; 

. Sense-objects: such as sound, touch &c., of 
pleasures seen or unseen. 

Parg—whether Adhyatmic, i. e.. arising in one's 
Own person, or Adhibhoutic, i. e, produced by 


externa) agents, or Adhidaivic, i. e., produced by 
supernatural beings, 

Heflection...pain—or the passage may be inter- 
preted as—reflection on the evils and miseries of 
birth, death, old age and sickness. Birth &c., are 
all miseries, not that they are miseries in them- 


* 


7-10 | THIRTEENTH CHAPTER 257 


selves, but because they produce misery. From 
such reflection arises indifference to sense- 
pleasures, and the senses turn towards the Inner- 
most Self for knowledge. ] 


प्रसक्तिरनभिष्वंग: पुत्रदारगृहादिषु ॥ 
नित्यं च समचित्तत्वमिष्टानिष्टो पपत्तिषु ॥६॥ 
XIII. 9. 

gat: Non-attachment पुत्रदारगृहांदिषु with som 
wife, home, and the rest ग्रनभिष्वंग: non-identifica- 
tion of self दृष्टानिशेषपत्तिषु in the occurrence of 
the desirable and the undesirable नित्यम्‌ constant 
amaaan even-mindedness च and, 

Non-attachment, non-identification of self 
with son, wife, home, and the rest, and 
constant even-mindedness in the occurrence of 
the desirable and the undesirable. 

[ ddentification Y self—as in the case of a 
person who feels happy or miserable when an- 
other to whom he js attached, is happy or miserable, 


and who feels himself alive or dead when his 
beloved one is alive or dead. ] 


मयि चानन्ययोगेन भक्तिरव्यसिचारिणी ॥ 
विविक्तदेशसेवित्वमरतिजेनसंसाद ॥१०॥ 
XIII. 10. 

मायि To me अनन्ययोसेन by Yoga of non-separa- 
tion अध्यभिचारिणी unswerving भक्ति: devotion 
विविक्तदेशसवित्वम्‌ resort to sequestered places 
जनसंसादि for the society of men smi: distaste. 

Unswerving devotion to Me by the Yoga 
of non-separation, resort to sequestered places, 
distaste for the society of men ; 


258 THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE— 
` Recort...places—favourable to equanimity of 

nd. so that uninterrupted meditation on the Self, 

he like, may be possible. 

Society of men: of the unenlightened and un- 

discipiined people, not of the pure and holy, be- 

cause association with the latter leads to Jnana. 


; SS नमः 
WAAR AAAS तत्त्वज्ञानाथदशनम्‌ ॥ 
as ~ = i PRA ; 
एतज्ज्ञानमिति ओक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा ॥११॥ 
KUL EE 

अध्यात्मज्ञानानेत्वत्वे Constant application to spirit- 
ual knowledge तत्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनस्‌ understanding the 
end of the knowledge of truth छत this ga% 
knowledge इति thus qi« is declared यत्‌ what aq: 
15 it अन्यथा opposed अज्ञान ignorance. 

Constant application to spiritual knowl- 
edge, understanding the end of the knowledge 
of Truth; this is declared to be knowledge, 
and what is opposed to it is ignorance. 

" These attributes—from °“ Humility’ to‘ Under- 
s.anding the end of the knowledge of Truth '—are 
declared to be knowledge, because they are the 
means conducive to knowledge. | 
ज्ञयं यत्तत्यवञ्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वाभ्मृतमश्वुते ॥ 

eo - _ 
अनादमत्पर ब्रह्म न सत्तन्नासडुच्यत ॥१२ी 
XIII. 12. 

aa Which ज्ञं 135 to be known ag that प्रवक्ष्यामिः 
l shall describe यत्‌ which ज्ञात्वा knowing अभृतं 
immortality आञ्चुते (one ) attains to तत्‌ it अनादिमत्‌ 
the beginningless qi supreme ब्रह्म Brahman qr 
neither gg being s nor असत्‌ non-being उच्यते is 
caed. 

I shall describe that which has to be 
known; knowing which one attains to 


kanl 


* * 

my "n 4 
ai H 4 1 m 
4 
1 c 


10-15] —KSHETRA & THE KSHETRAJNA 259 


immortality; the Beginningless Supreme 

Brahman, It is called neither being nor non- 

being. 

l e m~ æ C a A OAA 

सवेत: qti तत्सवतोभंचाशरोसुखसम ॥ 

aaa: श्रृतिमलोके सवेमाइत्य तिष्ठति ॥१३॥' 
XIII. 13, 

सर्वतः Everywhere पाणिपादं with hands and feet 
सर्वत: everywhere ग्रक्तिशिरो सुर्य, with eyes, heads and 
mouths aga: everywhere अतिमत with hearing तत्‌ 
that लोके in the universe सर्व, all आवृत्य. pervading 
तिष्टति exists. | 
. With hands and feet everywhere, with 
eyes and heads and mouths: everywhere, with 
bearing everywhere in the Universe,— That 
exists pervading all. | 
सर्वेन्द्रियगुशा भासं सर्वन्द्रियविवर्जितम॥ 

. t 0. > T , 
असक्तं war निशुणं गुण॒मोक्त च ॥१४॥ 
XIII. 14. 

सर्वेन्द्रियुणाभासं Shining by the functions of all 
the senses सर्वेन्द्रियविवर्जितं ( yet ) without the senses 
आस्तं devoid of all attachment or relativity सर्वेश्त 
sastaining all चव yet निर्शुणं devoid of Gunas 
JUR experiencer of the Gunas च and. 

Shining by the functions of all the senses, 
yet without the senses; Absolute, yet 
sustaining all; devoid of Gunas, yet their 
experiencet. 


बहिरन्तश्च भूतानामचरं चरमेवच ॥ 
सूक्ष्मत्वात्तदविज्ञेय दूरस्थं चान्तिके च TT UA 


50 — SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap.13. 


AT. “PS; 

warar (Of all) beings अहिः without च and अन्त: 
“thin अचर the unmoving kT the moving एव 
also * and सूक्ष्मत्वात्‌ because of being subtle आवित्तेय 
(is) incomprehensible geeq is far च and आन्तिके 
near च्‌ and तल it. 

Without and within (all) beings; the un- 
moving and also the moving; because subtle, 
ft is incomprehensible; and It is far and 
near. 

_ Jucomprehensibie—to the unillumined, though 
xnowable in Itself. 


Jur— when unknown. 
-Vezr—tio the illumined, because It is their own 


Self. | 
&. भूतेषु e. e. on 
अविभक्तं च भूतेषु विभक्तमिव च स्थितम्‌ ॥ 
* - e. e 
सूतसठ च तज्ज्ञेयं ग्रसिष्णु प्रभविष्णु च ॥१६॥ 
XII. 16. 

भूतेषु In beings ẹ and अविभक्तं impartible 
raat divided * yet इव as if स्थितं existing qa- 
aa as sustaining beings घसिष्णु devouring प्रभावेष्ण 
az generating च as well qq it ज्ञेय is to be known. 

Impartible, yet It exists as if divided in 
beings: It is to be known as sustaining 
beings; (and) devouring, as well as genera- 
ting them ). 

. Devouring—at the time of Pralaya. 


_ Generating—at the time of uipaizi or origin of 
the universe, ] 


ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिस्तमसः परमुच्यते॥ 
शानं शेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सवेस्य भिष्टितम्‌॥१७॥ 


1६-10]. THIRTEENTH CHAPTER 261, 


XII. r7. 
| ज््योतिषां Of lights आपि even ज्योति: light तमसः 
darkness षरं beyond qe It उच्यते is said (to be) 
ज्ञान knowledge ज्ञेय the one thing to be known 
ज्ञानगम्य the goal of knowledge सर्वेस्य of all afè in 
the heart धिष्टितस dwelling. 

The Light even of lights, It is said to be 
beyond darkness; Knowledge, and the One 
Thing te be known, the Goal of knowledge, 
dwelling in the hearts of all. 


[Ihe Light even of lights :—The Illuminator of all 
illuminating things, such as the sun &c., and 
Buddhi &c. Indeed, these latter shine only when 
illuminated by the Light of the consciousness of 
the Self. | 


इति क्षत्रं तथा ज्ञानं AT चोक्तं समासतः ॥ 
HEE एतङिज्ञाय मद्भावायोपपद्यते UVTI 
XIII. 16. 

इति Thus wp Kshetra तथा and ज्ञाने knowl- 
edge ज्ञय that which has to be known च and 
समासतः briefly wa have been stated ARAR: my 
devotee एतत्‌ this विज्ञाय knowing मङ्भावाय for my 
state उपपद्यते ¡$ fitted. 

Thus Kshetra, knowledge, and That which 
has to be known, have been briefly stated. 
Knowing this My devotee is fitted for My 
state, 
प्रकृति पुरुषं चेव विद्धानादी उभावपि N 

i * + e कक £^. 
विंकारांश्व गुणांश्रेव विद्धि प्रकतिसम्भवान्‌ ॥१६॥ 

XII. 10. 

yg Prakriti पुरुष Purusha « and एव indeed 

sap both आपि also अनादि beginningless faf know 
ZO ^ 


शहर THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE— 


(hou: विकारान्‌ (all) modifications च and wore 
Gunas @ and एव also प्रकृतिसनवान born of Prakriti 
fang know (thou.) 

Know thou that Prakriti and Purusha are 
both beginningless; and know thou also 
that all modifications and Gunas are born of 
Prakriti. 

 Modimeafiens— Vikdras: From Buddhi down 
to the physical body. | 


RC om x ~ bas 
कार्यकरणकत्त्वे हेतुः प्रकतिरुच्यते ॥ 
पुरुष: सुखदुःखानां भोक्तत्वे हेतुरुच्यते ॥२०॥ 
c 
NII. 20. 

कार्यकरणकतूस्वे In the production of the body 
and the senses प्रक्रतिः Prakriti हेतुः the cause उच्यते 
is said (to be) पुरुषः Purusha खुखदुःखानां of pleasure 
and pain [Red in the experience gg: the cause 
उच्यते is said (to be ). 

In the production of the body and the 
senses, Prakriti is said to be the cause; in 
the experience of pleasure and pain, Purusha 
is said to be the cause. " 

' Senses—five organs of perception, five of action, 
mind, intellect and egoism. 

Purusha: ihe Jiva is meant here. 

Kárya : The effect, the physical body. Karana: 


Senses. Some read Kdrana, and explain * Karya 
and Kárana' as ‘cause and effect.’ ] 


पुरुषः प्रकृतिस्थो हि ae पक्कतिजान्गुशान्‌॥ 
कारणं गुणसंगोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु ॥२१॥ 


19-22] —KSHETRA & THE KSHETRAJNA 263 


XIIL. 21. 

f& Indeed पुरुषः Purusha प्रकृतिस्थ: seated in 
Prakriti प्रकातिजञान born of Prakriti गुणात the Gunas 
XR experiences अस्य its सदसखोनिज्ञन्मस of birth in 
good and evil wombs गुणासंग: attachment to Gunas 
R the reason. 

Purusha seated in Prakriti, experiences the 
Gunas born of Prakriti; the reason of the 
birth in good and evil wombs is its attach- 
ment to the Gunas. 

[ Seated it: identifying himself with. 


Gunas—manifesting themselves as pleasure, pain 
and delusion. ] 


उपद्रष्टालुमन्ता च भतो भोक्ता महेश्वर: ॥ 


परमात्मोति चाप्युक्तो देहे$स्मन्पुरुषः परः ॥२२॥ 
XIII. 22. 


अस्मिन In this देहे in the body पुरुष: Purusha qv. 
Supreme उपद्रष्टा the looker-on अनुमन्ता the per- 
mitter = and भता supporter भोक्ता the experiencer 
महेश्वरः the Great Lord परमात्मा the Highest Self च 
and gfq thus gia also उक्त: is called. 

Aud the Supreme Purusha in this body is 
alsa called the Looker-on, the Permitter, the 
Supporter, the Experiencer and the Great 


Lord, and as the Highest Self. 


[ Looker-on, the Permitter—He Himself does not 
participate in the activities of the bodily organs, 
the mind and the Buddhi, being quite apart from 
them, yet seeming to be so engaged. And being a 
looker-on, He never stands in the way of the 
activities of Prakriti as manifested in the body. 
Indeed, all the consciousness or intelligence that 
manifests itself in the activities of life is but the: 


964 . SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 13. 


reflection of the All-pervading, Absolute and Perfect 
Intelligence—the Supreme Spirit. ] 

à ^ ह è Ceo» A 

य एवं वेत्ति पुरुषं प्रकति च pr सह ॥ 

e © ~ ha Oe ~ 
WAG ब्रतमानोऽपि न स भूयोऽभिजायते ॥२४॥ 

NII. 23. 

q: Who एवम्‌ thus gaya the Purusha रुणैेःसह with 
Gunas प्रक्राति Prakriti = and Xf& knows सः he. 
सत्नेथा in whatever way वर्तमानः living zrfd even FA: 
again q not अभिज्ञायते 15 born. 

He who thus knows the Purusha and 
Prakriti with Gunas, whatever his life, is not 
born again. 

| Whatever his life &c.: Whether he is engaged 
in duties and acts, prescribed or foibidden, he is 
not born agam. For, the acts, the seeds of rebirth, 
of a knower of Truth are fried by the fire of 
knowledge, and thus cannot be effective causes to 
bring about births, in his case they are mere 


semblances of Karma; a burnt cloth, for instance, 
cannot serve the purposes of a cloth. ] 


ध्यानेनात्माने पश्यन्ति केचिदात्मानमात्मना ॥ 
a सांख्येन योगेन कर्मयोगेन ATTT ॥२७॥ 
| AIII. 24. : 
कचित्‌ Some घ्यानेन by meditation आत्मनि in 
their own intelligence आत्मना' by the purified heart 
आत्मानम्‌ the Self षश्यान्ति behold अन्ये others सांख्येन- 
योगेन by the path of knowledge 3X others च 
again कमेयोगेन by Karma Yoga, 
Some by meditation behold the Self in 
their own intelligence by the purified heart, 


others by the path of knowledge, others again 
by.Karma Yoga, 


22-26] THIRTEENTH CHAPTER 263 


अन्ये त्वेवमजानन्तः श्रुत्वान्ये$य उपासते ॥ 
लप चाततरन्त्यच सत्यु श्वातपरायणा ॥२७॥ 
XIII. 25. 

अन्ये Another लु again एवम्‌ thus जानन्तः not, 
knowing अन्येन्य: from others megy as ( they have) 
heard उपासते worships ते these अ्रा also xrfe qure: 
regarding what they have heard as the Supieme 

Refuge मृत्यु death srfdquieq cross beyond एव even. 
Others again not knowing thus, worship as 
hey have heard from others. Even these cross 
beyond death, regarding what they have 
heard as the Supreme Refuge. 
Not knowing thus: not able te know the Self 


described above, by any one of the several methods’ 
as pointed out. 


Others: Acharyas ot spiritual teachers 
Pesarding—tollowing with Shraddha 


What they have heard, i. e., they solely depend 
upon the authority of other's instructions 


यावतसंजायते किचित्सत्वं स्थावरजंगमम्‌ ॥ 
च्चत्रच्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात्तद्विद्धि भरतषभ ॥२६॥ 
XIII. 28. l 

भरतर्षभ G bull of the Bharatas यावत किंचित what- 
ever स्थावरजंगमस the moving, the unmoving 
aeqa being Gara is born qq it चञेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात 
from the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna fate 
know (to be}. 

Whatever being is born, the moving or the 
unmoving, O bull of the Bharatas, know it 
to be from the union of Kshetra and 
Kshetrajna. 


966 THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE— 


- Union... Kshetrajza : The union of Kshetra 
anc Kshetrajna, of the object and the subject, is 
of the nature of mutual Adbyása which consists im 
confounding them as wel] as their attributes with 
each other, owing to the absence of diserimimation 
oí their real mature. This false knowledge 
vanishes when one is able to separate Kshetra 


` 
n 


from Kshetrajna. j 1 
समं aay भूतेषु तिष्ठन्तं परमेश्वरम्‌ di ' 
वचिनश्यत्खविनश्यंत यः पश्यात स पश्याति NASI 
ALII. 27. 

edu In all मूतेषु (in ) beings समं equally fauequ 
existing विनश्यत्सु 19 the dying आविनश्यतम्‌ death- 
less परमेश्वरम्‌ the Lord Supreme यु: who gafa 
sees सः he पुण्याति sees. 

He sees, who sees the Lord Supreme, 
existing equally in all beings, deatbless in the 


dying. 


— ion e Lens 
Aa पश्यन्‌ हि सर्वत्र समवास्थतमीश्वरम 

eo hai eC + £^. 
न [हनस्त्यात्मनात्मान तता यात परा गातमारप्ए 

AIIL 28. 

सर्वत्र Everywhere समझ equally समवांल्यतम existent 
इश्वरस्‌ the Lord फश्यन््‌ seeing आत्मनाः by self आात्मानस 
sell! न not हिनस्ति injures ततः so af highest 
गतिम्‌ to the goal याति (he) goes. | 

Since seeing the Lord equally existent 
everywhere, he injures not self by self, and so 
goes to the highest Goal. 

d He injures. esr re/f—like the ignorant mam 
either by ignoring the Self in others ( Avidya or 
nescience }, or regarding the non-self ( physical 
16659, c.) as himself ( Mithyá-jnana or false 


26-31] —KSHETRA & THE KSHETRAJNA 267 


kmowledge )—the two veils that hide the true nature 
of the Self. | 


THAT च कमोश्ि क्रियमाणानि सवश: ॥ 


A पश्याते तथात्मानमकतोरं सत्र पश्याते NEN 
| XII. 29. 

q: Who = and Raif actions gear by Prakriti 
wa alone सर्वेश: all [कियमाणानि being done तथा and 
आत्मानस the Self wata actionless पश्यति sees 
rhe gafa sees. 

And he sees, who sees Prakriti alone 


doing all actions, and that the Self is action- 
less. 


यदा भूतपूथग्मावमेकस्थमनुपश्यति ॥ 


लत एव च faari ब्रह्म संपद्यते तदा ॥३०॥ 
XIII. 30. 

wer When सूतपृ्थग्सावसश्‌ the separate existence of 
all beings sequ inherent in the One wagra 
sees qq: from that wq alone विस्तारम (their) expansion 
sq and तदा then arg; Brahman sies (he) becomes. 

Whea he sees the separate existence of 
all beings inherent in the One, and their 
expansion from That (Qne) alone, he then 
becomes Brahman. 


खअनादित्वान्निगुणत्वात्परमात्मायमव्ययः ॥ 
शरीरस्थोऽपि कोन्तेय न करोति न लिप्यते ॥३१॥ 
RUIL 31. 


zem O son of Kunti अनादित्वात being wi thout 
beginning निगुणत्वात्‌ being devoid of Gunas WHF, 


^ 


208 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap, 13. 


his gyeqa: immutable परमात्मा Supreme Self qen 
sisting in the body gfe though न neither 
करोति acts न nor लिप्यते is affected 

Being without beginning, and devoid of 
Ganas, this Supreme Self, immutable, O son 
of Kunti, though existing in the body neither 


acts, nor is affected. 


H 
w 
e 


Being without beginning—having no cause. 
NENT ede, affecfed—Because the Self is not the 
therefore He is not touched by the fruit 


- 


i 
e Me 
a > 


यथा सर्वेगतं सोक्ष्म्यादाकारं नोपलिप्यते ॥ 


सवत्रादास्थितो देहे तथात्मा नोपलिप्यते ॥३२॥ 
. XUL 32 
यथा Às सवेगतम्‌ the all-pervading आकाशम Akdsha 
aeara because of its subtility न not उपलिऱ्यते 
15 tainted तथा so सर्वच everywhere gz in the body 
HATA: existent आत्मा the Self न not उपलिप्यते is 
tainted 
As the all-pervading Akdsha because of 
3 8५०७. is not tainted, so the Self 
existent in the body everywhere is not 
tainted. 
यथा प्रकाशयत्येकः Heart लोकमिमं रवि: N 
चें चत्री तथा Hear प्रकाशयति भारत | ३३॥ 
AIIIL 33 
भारत © descendant of Bharata यथा as एक: the 
~ सातः sun इमम्‌ this pæra all लॉकस्‌ world 
Tarraa ilumines तथा so Wat he who abides in 


he Kshetra gema the whole WWW Kshetra प्रकाश- 
यति illumines. "A 


31-34 ] THIRTEENTH CHAPTER 269 


As the one sun illumines all this world, 
so does He who abides in the Kshetra, O 
descendant of Bharata, ilumine the whole 
Kshetra. i 
त्त्‌ तरत्तेत्रज्ञयोरेवमंतरं ज्ञानचक्चुूषा ॥ 
भूतप्रकातिमोक्षं च ये विदुर्याति ते परम्‌ ॥३४॥ 

XIII. 34. 

एवम Thus ज्ञेत्रक्षत्रज्ञयोः between the Kshetra and 
the Kshetrajna अंतरम्‌ the distinction भ्ृतप्रकृतिमोत्षम 
the emancipation from the Prakriti of beings च 
and (also? ज्ञानचक्तुबा with the eye of knowledge 
ये who fag: perceive ते they qu the Supreme 
यांति 80. 

They who thus with the eye of knowledge 
perceive the distinction between the Kshetra 
and the Kshetrajna, and also the emancipa- 
tion from the Prakriti of beings, they go to 
the Supreme. 

[ Prakriti of beings: the material nature OF 


delusion of beings due to Avidya. | 

इति च्षेत्रक्षे्रज्ञविभागयोगोनाम त्रयोदशोष्ध्याय:॥ 
The end of the thirteenth chapter designated, 

THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE KSHETRA 

AND THE KSHETRAJNA. 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


चतुदेशोभध्याय: ॥ 
FOURTEENTH CHAPTER 


श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥ 
चरं भूयः प्रवक्ष्यामि ज्ञानानां ज्ञानमुत्तमम्‌ di 
यज्ज्ञात्वा सुनयः aa परां सिद्धिमितो गताः ॥१॥ 
AIV. ‘Te 

xfraw4ra The Blessed Lord उवाच sai d: 

ज्ञानानास Of all knowledge SAAR the best चरस 
Supreme ज्ञानं knowledge sra: again प्रवक्ष्यामि shall I 
tell यत्‌ which सात्वा having known सर्वे all सुनयः the 
Muuis इतः after this life qq high सिद्धि to perfec- 
tion utar: have attained. 

The Blessed Lord said: 

Again shall ॥ tell thee that Supreme 
knowledge which is above all knowledge, 
having known which all the Munis have 
attained to high perfection after this life. 

| After this dife—atter being freed from this 
bondage of the body. | 


इदं ज्ञानमुपाश्रित्य मम साधम्येमागता: ॥ 
aüs नोपजायन्ते प्रलये न व्यथन्ति च ॥२॥ 
‘NIV, 2; 
gz This ज्ञानं knowledge उषाधभित्य abiding by 
अस arria to My Being आगता: having attained 


ही 


1-4] FOURTEENTH CHAPTER 211 


wat in evolution आपि न neither उपज्ञायन्ते do they 
come forth प्रलये in involution न च nor व्यथन्ति are 
(they) troubled. 

Abiding by this knowledge, having attained 
to My Being, neither do they come 
forth in evolution, nor are they troubled in 
involution. 


मम योनिमह़ह्म afer गभ दधाम्यहम्‌ ॥ 
संभव: सवेभूतानां ततो भवति भारत ॥३॥ 
XIV. 3. 

भारत O descendant of Bharata aga the Great 
wey Prakriti मम my योनि: womb तस्मिन्‌ in that 
अहे I गर्भम्‌ the germ दधामि I place ततः thence 
सर्वभूतानां of all beings संभवः the birth भवाति is. 

My womb is the Great Prakriti, in that 
J place the germ ; from thence, O descendant 
of Bharata, is the birth of all beings. 

| | Brahma: This word is derived from Brim, 
*to expand, and means here the vast seed or womb 


( the Prakriti) out of which the cosmos is evolved 
or expanded. 


J place the germ: Y infuse the reflexion of My 
Intelligence, and this act of impregnation is the 
cause of the evolution of the cosmos. | 


सर्वयोनिषु कोन्तेय मूतय: संभवंति या: N 
तासां ब्रह्म महद्योनिरहं बीज्ञप्रद: पिता ॥४॥ 

र 
` कौन्तेय 0 son of Konti सर्वयोनिषु in all the wombs 
ar: whatever Waa: forms संभवंति are produced 
तासाम their wea the Great ब्रह्म the Prakriti योनिः 
womb gł 1 बीजप्रदः seed-giying पिता Father. 


^ 


3 


972 THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE— 


Whatever forms are produced, O son of 
Kunti, in all the wombs, the Great Prakriti 
is their womb, I the seed-giving Father. 
सत्वं रजस्तम इति गुणा: THTAG AAT: ॥ 
fafa महाबाहो देहेदेहिनमव्ययम ॥५॥ 

XIV. 5. 

महाबाहो O mighty-armed सत्व Satva रञ्ज: Rajas 
aq: Tamas इति these प्रकृतिसंभवा: born of Prakriti 
zur: Gunas EZ inthe body अव्यय the indestruc- 
tible देहिनम्‌ the embodied निबश्नांते bind fast. 

Satva, Rajas, Tamas,—these Gunas, O 
mighty-armed, born of Prakriti, bind fast 
the indestructible embodied in the body. 


[ These Gunas—are the primary constituents of 
the Prakriti and are the bases of all substances; 
they cannot therefore be said to be attributes or 
qualities inhering in the substances as opposed to 
the substances. 

Embodied in the body: That abides in the body 
as if identified therewith. | 


तत्र सत्वं निमलत्वात्यकाशकमनामयम ॥ 


gaia बघाति ज्ञानसंगेन चानघ NEN 
XIV. 6. 

aaa O sinless one qx of these निर्मलत्वात from 
its stainlessness प्रकाशक luminous अनामयं free from 
evil स्तत्वं Satva सुखसंगेन by attachment to happi- 
ness ज्ञानसंगेन by attachment to knowledge = and 
agria binds. 

Of these, Satva, luminous and free from 
evil, from its stainlessness, binds, O sinless 
one, by attachment to happiness, and by 
attachment to knowledge, 


4-8 | —THREEFOLD GUNAS 273 


[ Binds by attachment fo happiness Cc: Binds 
the Self by the consciousness of happiness and 
knowledge in the shape of ‘Tam happy, ‘lam 
wise, which belongs properly to the Ksheira, but 
which is associated with the Self, the Absolute 
Intelligence and Bliss, through Avidya. ] 


रजो रागास्मर्क विद्धि तृष्शासंगसमुङ्गवम्‌ ॥ 
तञ्निबश्चाति कौन्तेय कमेसंगन देहिनम्‌ ॥७॥ 
XIV. 7. 

कौन्तेय O son of Runt रागात्मके of the nature of 
passion tat: Rajas तुष्णासंगसपुद्धवं giving rise to thirst 
and attachment विद्धि know qa it कर्मसंगोन by 
attachment to action दहिन the embodied निर्बधाति 
binds fast. 


. Know Rajas to be of the nature of passion, 
oiving rise to thirst and attachment, it binds 
fast, O son of Kunti, the embodied, by 
attachment to action. 

[ff binds &c—Though the Self is not the 
agent, Rajas makes Him act with the idea ‘/ am 
the doer. | 


तमस्त्वज्ञानजं विद्धि मोहनं सवेदेहिनाम्‌ ॥ 
प्रभादालस्यनिद्राभिस्तन्निबन्नाति भारत ASM 
XIV. 8. 

भारत O descendant of Bharata तमः Tamas तु and 
अजञानजे born of ignorance सचरदेहिनां to all embodied 
beings मोहन delusive बिद्धि know तत्‌ it प्रमादालस्यः 
निद्राभिः by miscomprehension, indolence and sleep 
faasa binds fast. 

And know Tamas born of ignorance, 
delusive to all embodied beings ; it binds fast, 


274 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 14. 


O descendant of Bharata, by miscompre- 
hension, indolence, and sleep. 

7 Delusive: causes delusion or non-discrimi- 
nation. | 
wed सुखे संजयति रज: wafer area di 
RANGA तु तमः प्रमादे संजयत्युत NEN 

XIV. 09. 

भारत O descendant of Bharata wed Satva सुरले 
to happiness संजयति attaches ta: Rajas कर्मणि to 
action उत्‌ while qq: Tamas g indeed ज्ञानं discri- 
mination आवृत्य shrouding प्रमादे to miscompre- 
hension संजयति attaches. 

Satva attaches to happiness, and Rajas to 
action, O descendant of Bharata, while Tamas, 
verily, shrouding discrimination, attaches to 
miscompreheusion. 


रजस्तमश्चाभिभूय सत्बं भवति भारत Il 
रजः सत्वं तमश्चैव तमः सत्वं रजस्तथा ॥१०॥ 
AIV. 10; 

भारत O descendant of Bharata सत्व Satva रज: 
Rajas qw: Tamas च and अभिभूय predominating 
over भवाति arises TH: Rajas qeq Satva तमः Tamas 
aq and तथा so aq Satva रजः Rajas तमः Tamas 
a and. 

Satva arises, O descendant of Bharata, 
predominating over Rajas and Tamas ; and 
Rajas over Satva and Tamas; so, Tamas 
over Satva and Rajas: 

[ When one or the other of the Gunas asserts 
itself predominating over the other two, it produces 


its own effect, as Satva, knowledge and happiness : 
Rajas, action ; Tamas, veiling of discrimination &c.] 


8-13] FOURTEENTH CHAPTER 213 


सर्वेक्वारेघु देहेऽस्मिन्प्रकाछ उपजायते ॥ 
ज्ञानं qar तदा faunas सत्वामित्युत ॥११॥ 
XIV. 11. 

यदा When marem in this देडे in the body सर्व- 
avy through every sense ज्ञानम्‌ (of ) intelligence 
प्रकाशाः light उपजायते shines तदाः then उत्त indeed 
सत्व Satva विवृद्ध (is) predominant gm that विद्याल 
(it) Should be known. 

When through every sense im this body, 
the light of intelligence shines, then it should 
be known that Satva is predominant. 


| Lwery sense—lit., all the gates. All the senses. 
are for the Self the gateways of perception. ] 


लोभः प्रवृत्तिरारम्मः कमेखामशमः स्पृहा ॥ 


रजस्यतानि जायन्ते ATS मरतषेभ ॥१२॥ 
XIV. ॥12, 

भरतषेभ O bull of the Bháiatas लोभः greed TATE: 
activity कमणां of actions आरम्भ: the undertaking 
अशमः unrest eer longing warts these रजसि in 
Rajas विवृद्ध (in) having become predominant जयन्ते 
arise. 

Greed, activity, the undertaking of actions, 
unrest, longing,—these arise when Rajas is 
predominant, O bull of the Bháratas. 

| Unresi—being agitated with joy, attachment &c. | 
अप्रकाशो STATA प्रमादो मोह एव च ॥ 
तमस्येतानि जायन्ते विद्वद्धे meses tz 
XIV, 13. 

कुरुनंदन 0 Descendant of Kuru अप्रकाशः darkness 

sat: inertness च and प्रमाद: miscomprehension 


276 THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE— 


सोह: delusion एव also च and एतानि these तमसि in 
Tamas faq (in) having become predominant जञायन्ते 
arise. 

Darkness, inertness, miscomprehension, and 
delusion,—these arise when Tamas is pre- 
dominant, O Descendant of Kuru. 


[ Darkness, inertness: Absence of discrimination, 
and its results, inertness &c. | 


यदा सत्वे TTS तु प्रलयं याति देहभृत्‌ N 
सदोत्तमविदां लोकानमलान्प्रतिपद्यते ॥१४॥ 
AIV. I4. 

यदा When तु if सत्वे in 88179 प्रवृद्धे (in) having be- 
come predominant gaa the embodied प्रलय death 
याति meets तदा then उत्तमविदास the knowers of the 
Highest अमलान्‌ the spotless लोकान्‌ worlds प्रतिपद्यते 
(he) attains. 

If the embodied meets death when Satva 
is predominant, then he attains to the spot- 
less regions of the worshippers of the 
Highest. 

[ Spotless regions: The Brahma-loka and the 
like. 

The Highest—Deities such as Hiranyagarbha.*] 


रजसि प्रलयं गत्वा$कमेसंगिषु जायते ॥ 
तथा प्रलीनस्तमसि मूढयोनिषु जायते Neil 
XIV. rs. 
cata In Rajas प्रलयं death गत्वा meeting कर्मसंगिषुः 
among those attached to action ज्ञायते (he)is born 
तथा so तमासे in Tamas प्रलीनः dying मूढयोनिषु in 
the wombs of the irrational जञायते (he) is born. 


४२-18] —THREE GUNAS 277 


Meeting death in Rajas, he is born among 
those attached to action; so dying in Tamas, 
he is born in the wombs of the irrational. 


[ Meeting...... Rajes: lí he dies when Rajas is 
predominant in him. | 


FAW: WHALE: सात्विकं निमलं फलम॥ 
रजसस्तु फले FARITA तमसः फलम्‌ ॥१६॥ 
XIV. 16. 

सुक्रतस्य ( Of ) good कर्मणः (of) action feriat. pure 
सात्विकं $41४० फलं the fruit syg: they say रजसः of 
Rajas तु verily दुःखे pain फूलं the fruit awa: of 
Tamas yat ignorance फलं the fruit. 

The fruit of good action, they say, is 
SAtvic and pure; verily, the fruit of Rajas is 
pain ; and ignorance, the fruit of Tamas, 

[ Rajas—means  Rájasic action, and Tamas,— 
TAmasic action, as this section treats of actions. | 


सत्वात्संजायते ज्ञानं रजसो लोम एवं च॥ 


्रमादमोहो तमसो सबतोऽज्ञानमेव च ॥१७॥ 
XIV. 17. 

qara From Satva ज्ञाने wisdom संजायते arises 
wu from Rajas लोभः greed एव indeed f and 
समस from Tamas अज्ञानं ignorance प्रमादमोंहो mis 
comprehension and delusion एवं even *w and 
saq: arise. 

From Satva arises wisdom, and greed from 
Rajas ; miscomprehension, and delusion and 
ignorance arise from Tamas, 


ऊध्व गच्छन्ति सत्वस्था मध्ये तिष्ठन्ति राजसाः 
जघन्यशुशदत्तिस्था अथो गन््छान्ति तामसाः॥१य॥ 
21 


^ 


7s SRIMAD-BEAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 14. 


XIV. 38. 

सत्वस्थाः The Satva-abiding guy upwards शच्छान्ति 
zo राजसाः the Rájasic मध्ये in the middle तिष्टन्ति dwell 
जपघन्यराणवृत्तिस्थाः abiding im the function of the 
lowest Guna तामसा: the 'l'ànasic gry: downwards 
गच्छान्ति go. 

The Satva-abiding go upwards ;the Rájasic 
dwell in the middle; and the Támasic, 
abiding in the function of the lowest Guna, 
zo downwards. 
नान्यं Spur: कतार यदा दष्टानुप्श्यात॥ 

a > फे d è on 
WUT पर दात्त ARTS साइथगच्छात ULE 

XIV. rg. | 
यदा When ger the seer शुशम्यःपर than the Gunas 
zip other mart agent न no saggy beholds 
zur than the Gunas पर higher Sfsp knows तदा 
then सः he agra My being आधिगच्छति attains to. 

When the seer beholds no agent other 
than the Gunas and knows That which is 
higher than the Gunas, he attains to My 
being. 

| Zhe Gunas—which transform themselves into 
the bodies, senses and sense-ohjects, and which 


in ail their modifications constitute the agent in all 
actions, 


. 


Anogzos...... the Gunas: Sees Him who is distinct 
from the Gunas, Wha is the Witness of the Gunas 
and of their functions.] 


गुशानेतानतीत्य त्रीन्देही देहसमुङ्गवान्‌ ॥ 
जन्मम्त्युजरादु:खेविमुक्तो$रतमक्षते ॥२०॥ 


18-22 | FOURTEENTH CHAPTER ' 219 


| XIV. 20, 
देहसमुद्धवाव Out of which the body is evolved 
चन three एतान्‌ these garg Gunas अतीत having 
crossed beyond जन्मग्रत्युजरादुःखेः from birth, death, 
decay and pain f3gx&: freed देही the embodied अतं 

immortality SUN attains to. 

The embodied, having crossed beyond 
these three Gunas out of which the body is 
. evolved, is freed from birth, decay and pain, 

aud attains to Immortality. 


e 
| Wat उवाच ॥ 
A amA ~ ` * MA 
कालिगेस्थान्गुशानतानतीता भवति प्रभो ॥ 
नि t ® * P Ç 
 किमाचारःकथ चेतांस्रोन्गुशानतिवतते॥२१॥ 
XIV. 21. 
अजुन Arjuna उवाच said: 
प्रमे O Lord TR: by what fair: marks पतात these 
sa three yura Gunas आनीतः WIA has crossed 
beyond किया चारः what (is his) conduct qp how 
«p and gra these चीन three गुणात Guas अतिववते 
- does (he) pass beyond. 
Arjuna said : 
By what marks, O Lord, is he (known) 
who has crossed beyond these three Gunas? 


What is his conduct, and how does he pass 
‘ beyond these three Gunas? 


श्रीभगवाडुवाच di 
THU च प्र्वात्त च मोहमेय च पायडव॥ 
. न EIE संप्रद्वत्तानि न fara काँचति ॥२२॥ 


280 THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE- 


XIV. zz. 

श्रीभगवान The Blessed Lord उवाच said: 

stasa O Pandava प्रकाश light (the effect of 
Satva) प्रवृत्तिस्‌ activity (the effect of Rajas) ate 
delusion (the effect of Tamas) छव च and also 
संप्रवृत्तानि (when) come forth sq not ate (he) hates 
निवृत्तानि when absent st nor afafa longs for; 

The Blessed Lord said : 

He who hates not the appearance of light, 
( the effect of Satva), activity (the effect of 
Rajas ), and delusion (the effect ‘of Tamas ), 
(in his own mind), O Pándava, nor longs for 
them when absent: 

[This answers Arjuna's first question. The 
man of right knowledge does not hate the effects 
of the three Gunas when they clearly present them- 


selves as objects of consciousness; nor does he 
long after things which have disappeared. ] 


à ~ ~ A 
उदासीनवदासीनो सणोर्या न विचाल्यते ॥ 
e w ७ ha m~ m~ . 
गुणा qued इत्येव योऽवतिष्ठति नगते ॥२३॥ 
AIV. 23. 
यः Who उदासीनदतव like one unconcerned आसीनः 
sitting रणे: by the Gunas # not विचाल्यते is moved 
गुणा: the Gunas वतंन्ते operate इत्येव (knowing) that 
श्रवतिष्ठाति is self-centred = not इंगले swerves ; 
He, who, sitting like one unconcerned, is 
moved not by the Gunas, who knowing that 


the Gunas operate, is Self-centred and swerves 
not; 


खमदु:खसुस; स्वस्थः समलोएाएमकांचन: ॥ 
तुल्यप्रियाप्रियों धीरमतुस्या्निदात्मसंस्तातिः ॥२४॥ 


22-26] —THREE GUNAS 281 


XIV. 24. 

यः Who समदःखसुरः alike in pleasure and pair 
gy: self-abidine समलोधाश्मकॉचन: regarding a 
clod of earth, a stone or gold alike तुल्याप्रियाप्रिय: 
the same to loved and unloved yfz: firm तुल्यनिदात्म- 
सैल्तातिः the same to censure and praise; 

Alike in pleasure and pain, Self-abiding, 
regarding a clod ofearth, a stone or gold 
alike; the same to loved and unloved, firm, 
the same to censure and praise ; 


[ Selfabiding: He remains in his own true 
mature. | 


सानापमानयोस्तुदयर्तुल्यो मित्रारिपक्षयोः ॥ 


 संवोरंभपरित्यागी गुणातीतः स उच्यते ॥२९॥ 
XIV. 25. 

च: Who atarata: in honour and in disgrace 
eu the same विद्यारिवत्नयी: to friend and foe तुल्यः 
the same सतीर्सरहित्याणी relinquishing all under: 
takings qr: he garara: crossed beyond the Gunas 
gega is said. 

The same in honour and disgrace, the 
same to friend and foe, relinquishing all 
uudertakings—he is said to have crossed 
beyond the Gunas, 

[inclining to neither of the dual throngs, ne 


firmly eads the path of Self-knowledge, and rises 
above the Gunas 


These three Slokas are in answer to Arjunas 
second question, P . 


आँ च योऽव्यभिचारेण भक्तियोगेन सेवते | 
i गशान्समतीत्येतान्‌ ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ॥२६। 


32 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 14. 


pu 


Uv 
a 


XIV. 26. 
Who « and arg Me व्याभिचार with un- 
c.erving भक्तियोगेन (with) devotion सेवते serves सः ` 
tc Ware these gara Gunas समतीत crossing beyond 
ब्रह्ममूयाय for becoming Brahman कल्पते is fitted 
And he who serves Me with an unswerving 
evotion, crossing beyond the Gunas, is 


€ 


y 


StteG for becoming Brahman. 
Iis answers Arjuna’s third question. ] 


ब्रह्मणो हि प्रतिष्ठाहमसतस्याव्ययस्व च ॥ 
शाश्वतस्य च धमेस्य सुखस्येक्ातिकस्थ च NWS" 
AIV. 27 

fz For az I wera: of Brahman gfe the abode 
gegen the immutable grgaex the immortal = and 
शाश्वतस्य everlasting धूर्मत्य of Dharma ऐकातिकस्य 
३55.५९ सुखत्य of bliss sr and 

For [am the Abode of Brahman, the Im- 
mortal and Immutable, of everlasting Dharma 
2.14 of Absolute Bliss, 


_ [—i3e Pratyagátman, the true Inner Self. T 


इति गुणत्रयविभागयोगोनाम चतदशोऽध्यायः ॥ 

2 ce end ofthe fourteenth chapter designated 
THE DISCRIMINATION OF THE THRE 
GUNAS, 


mom o D: a) 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 
॥ ऐचदशो५ध्याय: ॥ 
FIFTEENTH CHAPTER. 


श्रीभगवाजुवांच N 
JAJANAN a प्राहुरव्ययम्‌ ॥ 


arate यस्य qha यस्तं वेद स वेदवित्‌ deu 
XV. 1. 
sinara The Blessed Lord उवाच said : 
eius Rooted above अधःशाखं branching below 
grex eternal spem Ashvattha प्राहुः they speak of 
aeia the Vedas aeg whose षणानि leaves qur it 
a: who वेद knows सः he वेदवित्‌ (is) a Veda- 
knower. i 
The Blessed Lord said : 


They speak of an eternal Ashvattha rooted 
above and branching below, whose leaves are 
the Vedas; he who knows it, is a Veda- 
knower. 

( Ashvatiha: literally, that which does not endure 


till to-morrow: the Samsara, the ever-changing, 
phenomenal world. 


Brahman with Its unmanifested energy of Maya 
fis meant by “Above,” for’ It is supreme over ali 
things; and as such, the One above is the root ol 
this Tree of Samsára. Mahat, Ahamk4ra and the 
"Yanmátrás are its branches evolving to grosser and 


* 


^7 


984  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap.zs5. 


grosser states—hence it is said to be branching 
“ Below,” As leaves protecta t do the Veda 

elow. 5 leaves protect a tree, so do the Yedas 
protect the Tree of Samsára, as treating of Dharma 
end Adharma, with their causes and fruits. 


Fiernal— because this Tree of Samsara rests on à 
continuous series of births without beginning and 
end, and it cannot be cut down except by the 
knowledge, “I am Brahman.” | 


w 
MAAS प्रसतास्तस्य शाखाः 
P~ 
शुशप्रचद्धा वषयप्रवाला: ॥ 
* e 
MIA सूलान्यनुसततान 
© a 68 6५ a ७ 
कमानुबधान अनुष्यलाक ॥२॥ 
XY. 2. 

asa lts wearer nourished by the Gunas विषयः 
gatat: sense-objects (are) its buds शाखा: branches 
gq: below gef above «p and प्रसवाः spread age- 
लोक in the world of man कमोलुबंधीनि originating 
action yaffa the roots ay: below = and अनुः 
संतत्तं are stretched forth. 

Below and above spread its branches, 
nourished by the Gunas ; sense-objects are its 
buds ;and below in the world of man stretch: 
forth the roots, orginating action, 

[ Below: from man downwards. 

Gove: up to Brahma. 

Roots: ‘Vie tap-root is the Lord “ Above ”; the 
secondary roots are the Samskaras, attachment 
and aversion etc. It is these that, being in perpetuak 
succession the cause and consequence of good and 


evil deeds, bind one fast to actions—Dharma and 
Adharma. | - 


न रूपमस्येह तथोपलभ्यते 
atat न चदय च संप्रतिष्ठा d 


~ 


m 


3 


1-4] THE WAY TO THE SUPREME SPIRIT 285 


अश्वत्यमेनं सुविरूढ सू ल- 
è bot ~ om 

मससगशस्त्रण FSA rer ॥३॥ 
ततः पदं तत्परिमार्गितब्यं 

यस्मिन्गता न निवर्तेति भूयः di 
तमेव चाद्यं पुरुषं प्रपद्य 

यतः प्रदत्तः प्रस्ता पुराशी ॥४॥ 

XV. 3, 4. 

zg Here आस्य its wy form न not उपल्लभ्यते is 
perceived तथा as such न neither अब: (its) end म 
nor आदि: (its) origin न च nor संप्रतिष्टा (its) existence 
एनस्‌ this खुविरूढसूलं firm-rooted gre Ashvattha 
रहेन strong yanu with the sword of non- 
attachment f&esr having cut asunder qq: then qa 
that qå goal पारिमागेंतव्य is to be sought for यस्मिन्‌ 
whither गताः going भूयः again q not निवतोते ( thes ) 
return यतः: whence (एषा the) पुशणी eternal प्रवृत्ति: 
activity परवा streamed forth तस्‌ in that एव sqindeed 
आख Piimeval ggg Purusha wae 1 ५६८४ refuge. 

Its form is not here peiceived as such, 
neither its end, nor its origin, nor its existence, 
Having cut asunder this firm-rooted Ashvat- 
tha with the strong sword of non-attachment, 
—then that Goalis to be sought for, going 
whither they (the wise) do not return again. I 
seek refuge in that Primeval Purusha whence 
streamed forth the Eternal Activity. 

[is such: it cannot be said to exist, because it 
appears and vanishes every other moment, See 
commentary IT, 16. 

Tai— Yvhat-—Sankara and Anandagiri read ‘Tatah,” 


and explain it as beyond or above the Ashvattha, 
the Tree of Samsara, 


=86 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 15. 


The Eternal Activity: this ever-passing work of 


projection, this ever-flowing current of evolution, 
the worlu of phenomena. | 


निर्मानमोहा जितरसेगदीबा 
अध्यात्मनित्या विनिइत्तकामाः ॥ 
aigar gagag- ` 
गेच्छंत्यसूढाः पदमव्ययं AT dull 
AV. S. 

निमानमोदाः Free from pride and delusion 
जिदतरदोबाः with the evil of attaciument conquered 
आध्यात्मतित्या: ever dwelling in the Self विनिवृत्तकॉमा: 
will desires completely receded Supe known 
as pleasure and pain a=: fiom the pairs of 
opposites (Faz: liberated agat: the undeluded 
ag that अव्यय eternal षर्‌ goal गच्छेति reach. 

Free from pride and delusion, with the evil 
of attachment conquered, ever dwelling in 
the Self, with desires completely receded, 
liberated from the pairs of opposites known 
as pleasure and pain, the undeluded reach 


that Goal Eternal. 


न agaaa सूर्या न शरशांको न पावक: di 
यद्गत्वा न निवतन्ते तद्धाम परमंमम -+ 
XV. 6. 

aa Whither गत्वा going न not नितरतन्ते (they) return 
तत्‌ that gå: the sun न not भासयते illumines a 
nor शशांक: the moon sq nor पावक: fire aa that मम 
My परम supreme धाम abode, 

That, the sun illumines not, nor the moon, 
nor fire; That is My Supreme Abode, going 
whither they return not, 


a^ 


4-8] THE WAY TO THE SUPREME SPIRIT 287 ' 

Ke Oe iUm A : 
ममैवांशो जीवलोके जीवभूतः सनातन: di 

AT e m~ e an 
मनः:षष्ठानीन्द्रियाशि प्रक्कतिस्थान RATA ॥७॥ 
SN टी; 

प्रम एव Of Myself सनातनः eternal अशः portion 
siaa: having become a living soul प्रकृतिस्थानि 
abiding in the Prakriti मनःषष्ठानि with mind as the 
sixth इन्द्रि the (five) senses जीवलोके in the 
would of life कषति draws (to Itself). 

An eternal portion of Myself, having ber 
come a living Soul in the world of life, diaws 
(10 Itself ).the (five) senses with mind for 
the sixth, abiding in Prakriti. 

[ The Jiva or the individual soul is that aspect 
of the Supreme Self which manifests Himself in 
every one as the doer and enjoyer, being limited 
by the Upadhis set up by Avidjà; but in reality, 
both are the same. It is like the Akisha (space) 
in the jar, which is a portion of the Infinite 


Akásha, and becomes one with the latter on the 
destruction of the jar, the cause of limitation. | 


शरीर यदवाम्नोति यच्याप्युत्कामती*बर:॥ 
गही त्वेतानि संयाति वायुभेन्यानिवाशयात्‌ Noh 
| XV. 8. 

ईर: The Lord aa, when शारीर a body sperma 
obtains ag when मच and अधि also उत्क्रामति leaves 
(it) वायुः tbe wind आशयात्‌ from (their) seats 
गन्धान्‌ the scents qq as watt these गृहिला taking 
qutd goes. 

When the Lord obtains a body and when 
He leaves it He takes these and goes, as the 
wind takes the scents from their seats (the 
flowers ). | 


"^ 


288 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [ Chap. 15 


[ Lord: Jiva spoken of in the preceding Sloka. 

When the Jiva leaves the body, then he draws 
round himself the senses and the Manas. When 
he enters another he takes these again with him, 
i. ९., he is born with these again. ] 


श्रोतं चञ्चुः स्पशनं च रसनं घ्राशमेव च di 
अधिष्ठाय मनश्चायं विषयानुपसेवते NEN 
XV. g. 

aq He xx the ear चक्षुः the eye स्पशेन the 
( organ of ) touch ax 3 the ( organ of) taste = and 
Sm the (organ of) smell छत्र च्च as also मनः the 
iniud gza presiding over fqqum objects उप- 
सेदते (lie) experiences. 

Presiding over the ear, the eye, the touch, 
taste and smell, as also the mind, He ex- 
periences objects. 
sana खितं वापि ward वा शुणान्वितम N 
विथूडा नाजुपश्यंति पश्यत ज्ञानचक्लुषः ॥१०॥ 

XV. 10. 

getag Transmigrating (from one body to an- 
other) स्थि residing (in the same) वापि or Wart 
experiencing gamera united with the Gunas fy wer: 
the deluded न not zaqeareg do see( Him) aTa- 
way: those who have the eye of wisdom पश्यन्ति 
behold (iiim). 

Transmigrating from one body to another, 
or residing ( in the same) or experiencing,— 
as He is united with the Gunas,—the deluded 
do not see Him, but those who have the eye 
ot wisdom behold Him. 


'[ Though Atman is nearest and comes most 
easily within the range of their consciousness in a 


क 


290 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 15. 


P adhi 


गामाविश्य च भूतानि धारयाम्यहमोजसा |i 
पुष्णामि चौपधीः WAT: सोमो भूत्वा रसात्मकः १३ 
AVe ण; 

gz I spar wich My energy गाम the earth 
अतिशय entering Watts all beings ध्यरयामि (1) support 
रसा मक: Valery सोबर: moon च and भूत्वा becoming 
सर्वा: all आष वी: the herbs पुष्णानि I nourish, 

Entertue the earth with My energy, F 
support all beings, and [ nourish all the herbs,, 
becemiu: the watery moon. 

[ Afxergy—Gjas: The energy of the Ishvara,. 
whereby the vast heaven and the earth are firmly 
heli. 

Nearisk—by infusing savours into them. 


Lhe watery moon: lhe Soma, moon, is consi- 
dered as the repository or the embodiment of alk 


fluids ( asas ). ] 
अहं वेश्वानरों भूत्वा प्राणिनां देहमाशितः d 
धाणापावसमायुक्तः पवाम्यत्न चतुर्विधम ॥१४॥ 
XV. 14. 

छह 1 वैश्वाराः (the fire ) Vaishvánara सूखा be- 
coming प्रानः oi living beings ẹ in the body 
Bray: abiding प्राणापानसभमायुक्तः associated with 
Prana and Ap&na Varig fourfold अजम the food 
वचात | divest 

Abiding in the body of living beines as 
(the fre) Vaishvüuara, J, associated with 
Priya and A pána, digest the fourfold food. 

[ See IV. 29 i 

Paishrdnasre : The fire abiding in the stomach, 


fourfold food: Food which has to be eaten 


ex (1) mastication, (2) suckin licking 
$wauowing. | (2) ‘ing, (3) licking, (4) 


.13-16] THE WAY TO THE SUPREME SPIRIT 291 


' सवस्य चाहं हृदि संनिविष्टो 
l ~ € > 
मत्तः स्मृतिज्ञानमपोइनं च ॥ 
EN 30, s 
चेदेश्व सर्वरहमेव वेद्यो 
वेदान्तकृद्वेदविदेव चाहम्‌ ॥१५॥ 
XV. IS. 
अह I ux of all हादे in the heart संनिविष्टः 
centred p and aw: from Me &gfqd: memory ज्ञानं 
perception zrqd[z« (heii) loss च as well as सर्वेः by all 
Ere (by ) the Vedas च and we 1 छव verily Faq: 
that which has to be known बेदांतकत the author of 


‘Vedanta वेदावेत the knower of the Veda * and 
ae 1 एव indeed. 


I am centred in the hearts of all; memory 
and perception as well as their loss come 
from Me. Tam verily that which has to be 
known by all the Vedas, I indeed am the 
Author of the Vedanta, and the Knower of 
‘the Veda am I. 

[ Memerr—of what was experienced in the past 
births ; and Zzezeledze—-of things transcending the 
ordinary limits of space, time and visible naiure.— 
A nandagtrt. 


. , Come from Me—as the result of their good or 
evil deeds. 


/ andeed ...... Vedanta: It isl whoam the Teacher 
of the wisdom of the Vedanta, and cause it to be 
han.led down in regular succession. ] 


'द्वावीमो पुरुषो लोके चरश्चाच्र एव च ॥ 
स्रः सवोशिश भूतानि कूटस्योऽचर उच्यते ॥१६॥ 
NV. 16. 


त्तरः The Perishable अक्षर: the Imperishable = and 
हो two एव indeed gar distinct पुरुषो (two) Purushas 


202  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 15. 


(beings) लोके in the world सर्वाणि all भूतानि beings 
wt: (are) the Perishable कूरत्थ: the Kutastha खच्छशः 
the Imperishable उच्यते is called. 

There are two Purushas in the world,—the 
Perishable and the Imperishable, All beings 
are the Perishable, and the Kutastha is 


called Imperishable. 

[ Two Purushas: Two categories—arranged in 
two separate groups of beings,—spoken of as 
* Purushas,' as they are the Upadhis of the Purusha. 

A'udastha : That which manifests Itself in various 
forms of illusion and deception. It is said to be 
imperishable, as the seed of Samsára is endless,—in 
the sense that it does not perish in the absence of 
Brahma-jnana. | 

am " ane ape * 
SUA. पुरुषस्त्वन्य. परमात्मत्युदाहत:॥ 
य ~ ~ (n ® © 
या लाकनयमावरय बसत्यव्यय इश्वरः ॥१७॥ 
XV. 17. 

अन्यः Another g but उत्तम! the Supreme पुरुष: 
Purusha परमात्मा the Highest Self gfq thus उदादत: 
called यः who इश्वरः Lord अव्यः the Immutable 
Sr the three worlds आविश्य pervading मिमाति 
sustains ( them ). 

But (there is) another, the Supreme 
Purusha, called the Highest Self—He who, 
the Immutable Lord, pervading the three 
Worlds, sustains them. 


{| Another : quite distinct from the two. 
The three Worlds: BAuA (the Earth ), Bhuvak 
(the Mid-Region ) and Svak (the Heaven), 





यस्मात्त्रमतीतो$्हमचरादपि sp: i 
अताऽस्म लोके वेदे च प्रथितः पुरुषोत्तमः Neca 


16-20] THE WAY TO THE SUPREME SPIRIT 293 


AV, 18, 

यस्मात्‌ As ye 1 atthe Perishable wara: transcend 
अक्षरात than (to) the [mperishable अपि even 
JWR: superior s and wa: therefore ap in the 
world We in the Veda = and पुरुषोत्तम: the 
Purushotlama (the Highest Purusha) इति as प्रथितः 
celebrated सास्मि ain 1. 

As E transcend the Perishable, and am 
above even the [mperishable, therefore am I 
in the world and in the Veda celebrated as 
the Purushottaria, (the Highest Purusba). 

[Zhe Perishable — Tree of Samsâra called 
Ashvatihia, 


Je mn periskable——Which constitute the secd of 
the Tree of Samsara. 


be = » hes p » 
या मभवमसयूढा जानात पुरुषातक्तमम ॥ 
, v c. E Leni » S "s “ 
स WATE Aa मा Say laa भारत di vell 

AM. 10. 

ariq O descendant of Bharata gr: who "wq thus 
yaya: free from delusion TESI the Supreme 
Purusha माम Me ज्ञानानि knows gp: he Tat दत kaow- 
ing all qaaa as the All-being मास Me भर्जात 
worships. 

ile who, free from delusion thus knows 
Me as the Supreme Purusha, he, knowing all, 
worships Me as the All-being, O descendant 
of Bharata. 

PN शु ^ MEI vex Rn. 
att Wada शास्त्रामदसुक्त HITA ॥ 

* e - F 3 v 
Rael AURAT स्यात्ळृतळत्यश्व भारत ॥२०॥ 
XV. 20), 

wam O sinless one भारत O descendant of 

Bharata इति thus waa most profound xz this 
23 


22 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap. 15 


nra २९३0 मया by Me उक्त has been imparted 
mag this दुद्ध्या knowing gfgara possessed of 
. highest) intelligence gaga: accomplished all the 
. highest} tasks = and स्यात्‌ becomes. 

Thus, O sinless one, has this most pro- 
‘ound teaching been imparted by Me. Know- 
ing this, he attains the highest intelligence 
1d the accomplishment of all. his: duties, O! 
iescencant of Bharata 


hesé intelligence—which realises the Brahman, 
( ins) fhe accomplishment...... duties: What- 
zeer duty one has to do in life, all that duty has. 
Seen d hen the Bral lised 
2६520 cone, when the Brahman is realised, } 


f w, कड च æ j 
बात Jara Ran नाम घचदराऽ्च्यायः ॥. 
The end of the fifteenth chapter designated. 

THE WAY TO THE SUPREME SPIRIT. 


Srimad- Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥घोहशोष्प्याथ:॥ 


SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. 


AATNI ॥ 
S ep पड TEISUITNIGUISIGT 
SUD ATAATA TTN TIET: d 
दानं दमश्च WHAT खाध्पायस्तप अज TT ud 
AVI 3 

xf The Blessed Lord डाच sai dy 

अभय Fearlessness यासरयछद्भिः purity of heart 
नानयोग्यपस्याति; steadiastiess 11) knowledge and 
Yoga दानम giving away as chuiy दमः control of 
the senses sg: Vajna Fme: reading of the 
Shastras qq: austerity MT: uprighiness ; 

The Blessed Lord said : 

Fearlessness, pmity of heart, steadfastness 
jn knowledge and Yoga, giving away as 
charity, control of the senses, Yajna, reading 
of the Shastras, austerity, upriglitness ; 

[ Toga—consists m making what has been learnt 
from the Shástras and the Ach'rva, an object ot 
one's own direct perczptigu, by concentrauon. and 
self-control, | 

fz नत हग p ex S z ange 
झहिंसा सत्यमक्तोघस्त्याग: शांतिरपेशुनम d 
भूते has ~? á feu e aa q ' 
दया भतेण्वलालुप्त्य AF sg xu mue an 


296 THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIVINE— 


XVI. 2. 

yar Non-injuriousness सत्यं truth STAT: absence 
of anger त्याग: renunciation aira: tranquility 
gàgi absence of calumny भूतेषु to beings दया 
compassion faig q uncovétousness मादव gentle- 
ness हीं; modesty marqa absence of fickleness 

Nondipjrioiiréis truth, absence of anger, 
renunciation, tranquility, absence of calumny, 
compassion to beings, non-covetousness, 
gentleness, modesty, absence of fickleness ; 


F IVon-covelousness ५ Unaffectedness of the senses 


when in contact with their objects 
Absence of fickleness: Avoidance of useless 


actions— Sridhar. | 

तेजः च्मा धृतिः शोचमद्रोहो नातिमानिता ॥ 

भवति संपदे देवीममिजातस्य भारत ॥३॥ 
PV 1६: . 3. 

तेज: Boldness सना forgiveness fy: fortitude 
wra purity were: absence of hatred नाजेमानैेता' 
absence of pride देसी divine संपद state आभिजा/तस्य 
to one born for wf T (these) belong भरत O descen- 
dant of Bharata. 

Boldness, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, 
absence of hatred, absence of pride; these be- 
long to one born fur a divine state, 0 
descendant of Bharata, 
देभो दपाऽभिसानश्च कथः पारुष्यमेच च ॥ 
अज्ञानं चामिजातस्य पाथ संपदमासुरोम NBN 

XVI. 4 

पार्थ 0 Partha दभः ostentation e$: ai rogance «y 

and भिमानः self-conceit क्रोधः anger पारुष्ये 


—AND THE NON-DIVINE ATTRIBUTES 297 


harshness «p and अरज्ञाने ignorance च एव as well as 
SIT an Asuric Gye state अरनिज्ञातस्य to one who is 
born for. 

Ostentation, arrogance and self-conceit, anger 
as also harshness and ignorance, belong to one 
who is born, O Partha, for an Asuric state. 

[ 37776: demoniac.] 
देवी संपद्धिमोच्षाय नित्रंधायासुरी मता ॥ 
झा शुचः संपदं देवीमभिज्ञातोईसि पारडव Uil 
. XVI. 5. 

rfr The divine संपद state FrATara for liberation 
Sigg the Asuric faia for bondage मला is 
d.emed (as mature) पाणडव O Pándava मा not 
SINE: grieve दे the divine qe state अभिजातः born 
for आशि thou art. 

The divine state is deemed (as mature) for 
liber tion, the Asaric for bondage; grieve not, 


O Páudaxa, thou art born for a divine state. 


हो भूतसर्यी लोके$स्मिन्देव AQT एवं च॥ 
दयो विस्तररा: प्राक्त आसुरं पाथ म cum ॥३॥ 
XVI. 6. 

qvi O Pártha ग्रस्मिन in this लोके world देय: the 
divine gg the Asuric @ and ‘ar two Wait 
manifestations of beings देव: the divine वित्तरश: at 
length प्रोक्तः has been described ग्रासुर of the 
Asuric मे frum me syg hear. 

There are two manifestations of beings in 
this world, the divine and the Asuric. The 
divine has been described at Jength; hear 
from Me, O Partha, of the Asuric, 


SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 16, 


908 
प्रशासि च निञ्गत्ति न विदुरासुराः | 
न शौच नापि चाचारो न सल तषु विद्यते ॥७॥ 


ZUM SE, 

आसरा: The Asuric saf: persons qaf what to 
do च and निवृत्त what to refrain | irom sf not rag: 
know wq in them m neither qra purity न nor 
TIC conduct p nor qe ruth विद्यते is 

The persons of casuric nature know mot 
what to do and what to 1efrain. from: neither 
purity, nor conduct, nor truth 15 11) them 

° That to do..... one: What acts they should 


ps rior to achieve tlie end ot man, nor what ACIS 
they should abstain from lo avert evil ] 


असत्यमप्रतिष्ठ ते जगदाहुरनीन्यरम ॥ 


अपरस्परसंभूतं किमन्यत्कामहे तुम्‌ USN 
AVE. 5७. 
जगत The universe गणाचे (is) without truth Sp 
Hfxz without (moral ) basis Mt without a God 
प्रपरस्पर्सभूतं brought about by mutual union किमन्यस 
whai else कामटेतुकं with lust for iis cause spi 
they sa 


t 2 


1 


0 


hey sav, “The universe is without trutt 
vithout č moral? basis, without a God, broueht 


kS 


about by mutual union, with lust for its 


- 


eu 


cause ; what else?" 


| Without truth: As we ate unreal so this uni- 
verse is unreal, and the sacred Scriptures that 
declare the truth are unreal 


What else? —but lust can be the cause of the 
universe 7— This is the view of the Lokiyatikas, the 
materialists,! -..- 


e 


7-11] SIXTEENTH CHAPTER 299 


qat ARISI नणात्मानों$ट्पबुद्ध यः ॥ 
असव॑त्युञ्रकमो णः च्याय जगतो दिता: NEN 
XVI 9 

gegga: Of small intellect wat this gf view 
ggg holding नशष्टात्मान। ruined souls उथकमाण of 
fierce deeds अहिताः the enemies pra: of the world 
«gara for (its) destruction STE rise. 

Holding this view, these ruined souls of 
small intellect, of fierce deeds, rise as the 
enemies of the world for its destruction 

( Small infellect—as it concerns itself only with 
sense-objects, and cannot soar higher. ] 


काॉममाधित्य दुष्पूरं देभभानमदान्विताः M 
भोहादग्दीत्वाधसद्वाहान्धवतन्तेध्शाचबताः: tte 
XVI. 10. 
gegt Insatiable कान desire आश्रत्य abiding in 
 देभमानमदार्विता। possessed with ostentation, pride 
and arrogance मोहात through delusion अ्रसदमारान 
evil ideas गुदस्य holding अश्ञाचित्रता। with impure 

resolve प्रवत they work. | 

Filled with insatiable desires, possessed 
with ostentation, pride and arrogance, hold- 
ing evil ideas through delusion, they work 
with impure resolve, 


चिन्तामपरिमेयाँ च घ्रलर्यातासुपाश्चिताः॥ 
कामोपभोगपरमा एताचदिति निश्चिताः ॥११॥ 
XVL' ir 


प्रयाताम्‌ Ending only with death आपरिमयास्‌ 
immense चिन्ता cares उवाशिदय beset with कामापभांगः 


SIFICATION OF THE DIVINE-- 


u$ 
त 
t 
tri 
C1 
ES 
yu 
U) 


-ding gratification of lusts as the highest 
1 इति that निश्चिताः feeling sure. 


aud feeling sure that that is all; 


- Ceres—as to the means of acquiring and 
preserving the innumerable objects of desire. | 


4 
a 


प्राशापाशरातिब RT: कामक्राधपरायशाः di 
ईहन्ते कामभागाथमन्यायनाथसचयान ॥१२॥ 
AVI. 12, 

gmana: Pv a handred ties of hope qure 
bound कामकोधपरायशाः given over Io lust and 
wrath कानभागार्थ for sensual enjoyment अन्यायेन by 
aniust means अधेसेंचयान hoards of wealth fzeg 
( thes ) strive (to secure ) 

Bomul by a hundied ties of hope, given 
cover to lust and wrath, they strive to secure 
Dy unjust means hoards of wealth for sensual 
111९9१1111, 


इृदमच मया लब्धमिम प्राप्स्ये मनोरथम्‌ ॥ 


इदमस्तीदमाप मे भविष्यति WOW ॥१३॥ 
XVL 13. 
गद्य To-day मया by me gå this geya has beem 
gained gë this मनोर desire yr 1 shall obtain 
t€ ibis spfeq is पुनः again (in future) X mine 
Fe this आशि also धनस्‌ wealth भविष्यति shall be. 
“This to-day has been gained by me; 
this desire I shall obtain ; this is mine, and 
this wealth also shall be mine in future, 


" 


—AND THE NON-DIVINE ATTRIBUTES 301. 


असौ मया हतः शत्रुहनिष्ये चापरानपि ॥ 
ईश्वरोऽहमहं भोगी सिद्खोऽहं बलवान्सुखी ॥१४॥ 
XVI. 14. 

असो That qg: enemy मया by me इतः has been 
slain अपरास others sp and आपि also हनिष्ये shall 
I slay gè I इश्वरः lord अहं | भोगी enjoyer अहं 1 
l सिद्धः (am) successful gaara powerful gæt 
happy. 

“That enemy has been slain by me, and 
others also shall I slav. Tam loid, I enjoy, 
fam successful, powerful and happy. 


भ्राठ्योपभिजनवार्नास्म कोऽन्योऽस्त सहशो मजा ॥ 


यक्ष्य दास्यामि मोदिष्य इत्यडञानांवमाहता:॥१५॥ 
XVI. rs. 

sroq: Rich अभिन्ननत्रान vwell-boim अस्मि I am 
मया to me BEM: equal sag: else कः who अस्ति 
is gx [ will sacrifice apam T will give मोदिष्ये 
I will rejoice इति thus garaia deluded by 
ignorance, 

“I am rich and well-born. Who else is 
equal to me? I will sacrifice, I will give, 
I will rejoice” Thus dekuded by ignorance, 


भ्रनेकासित्तविश्चांता मोहजालसमावृता: ॥ 


प्रसक्ता: कामभोगेषु पतन्ति नरकेऽशुचो ॥१६॥ 
XVI. 16. 
अनेकचित्तविभ्रांताः Bewildered by many a fancy 
मोहजालसमावृताः covered by the meshes of delusion 
कामभोगेषु to the gratification of lust प्रसक्ताः addicted 
न ate 
अझुचौ foul नरके into a hell qaa ng sory 


^ ut 





253.23 


302 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 16. 


Bewildered by many a fancy, covered by 
the meshes of delusion, addicted to the 
gratification of lust they fall down into a 
foul heil. 
झाव्मसंभाविताः स्तव्था 'घनमानमदान्विता: ॥ 
यजन्ते नामयज्ञैस्ते दम्भेनाविधिपूवकम ॥१७॥ 

EN 512. 

आत्मरासाविताः  Self-conceited स्तडघाः haughty 
धनमानमदान्विताः flied with the pride and intoxica- 
tion of aeakh ते they gary out of ostentation q[q- 
तेः 3820110025 in name अविधिपूर्वकं disregarding 
ordinance gweg they perform; 

Self-conceited, haughty, filled with the 
pride and intoxication of wealth, they perform 
sacrifices, in name, out of ostentation, dis- 
regarding ordinance; 

WEA वले दये कार्म BTA च संश्रिताः ॥ 
सामात्मपरदंहे यु भद्विषन्तो$न्यसूयका: ॥१८॥ 
AVI. 18. 
Heart Egoism बलं power zy insolence कार्म lust 


क्रोध wrath च and आशिताः possessed of आत्मपरदेहेणु 
in the bodies of others and in their own मास Me 


(ihe Self within ) प्रह्रिषेतद hating ग्रथयसूयका: ( these ) 
inaitrnant peop e 

Possessed of egoism, power, insolence, lust 
and wrath, these malignant people hate Me 
(the Self within), in their own bodies and 
those of others, á 


तानहं दिषतः क्र्रान्संसारेयु नराधमान di 
चिपाम्यज्ञज्मशुभानाखुरीष्वेव योनिषु ॥१६॥ 


16-21 ] SIXTEENTIL CHAPTER 305 


XVI. 19. 

खरे 1 वषत: malicious muwa cruel नराधमान्‌ most 
degraded of men gata evil-doers संसारेषु in these 
worlds खासुरीषु of Asuras थीनिषु into the wombs 
एव only aag perpetually द्विपां (1) burl, 

These malicious and cruel evil-doers, most 
degraded of men, I hurl perpetually into the 
“wombs of Asuras only, in these worlds. 

Womes of the Asuras: Wombs of the most cruel 
beings, as tigers, snakes, etc. ] 


Worlds: Paths of Samsara passing through 
many a hell.” 


WAC योनिमापन्ना Wet जन्मनि जन्मनि ॥ 
मामप्राप्येव कोन्तेय ततो याम्त्यश्चमां Teu. ॥२०॥ 
| XVI. 2o. 

कौन्तेय O son of Kunti war: deluded जन्मनि 
ज्ञन्मानि birth after birth wg the Asuric निश 
wombs 'ग्रापन्ञा: obtaining माम्‌ me अप्राप्य not attain- 
ing एव still त्ततः than that saqaf lower गाति con- 
dition दान्ति they fall into. 

Obtaining the Asuric wombs, and deluded 
birth after birth, not attaining Me, they thus 
fall, O son of Kunti, into a still lower 
condition, 


fag नरकस्येदं द्वारं नाशनमात्मनः di 


कामः कोधस्तथा लोसस्तस्मादतत्रयं BAT ॥२१॥ 
| XVI. 21. 
कामः Lust क्रोधः 278०" तथा and ant: greed g& 
this त्रिविध triple नरकस्थ of bell gre the gate Wena: 
of the self नाशनं destructive एतत. these saa three 
खज्ञेद ( 016 ) should forsake. 


3 


204 THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIVINE— 


Triple is this gate of hell, destructive of the 
self—lust, anger and greed; therefore one 
should forsake these three. 


| Destructive of the self: making the self fit for 
no human end whatever. ] 


Aga: कोन्तेय तमोद्वारखिमिनेर: ॥ 
अचरत्यात्मनः श्रेयस्ततो याति परां गतिम NRI 
AVI. 22. 

कौन्तेय O son of Kunti एतेः from these fà: three 
WUumrc gates of darkness (hell) AIR: free नरः the 
man आत्मनः for himself yay: what is good आचरति 
practises qq: and then परां Supreme गाति Goal 
याति goes to. 

The man who has got beyond these three 
gates of darkness, O son of Kunti, practises 
what is good for himself, and thus goes to 
the Goal Supreme. 

[Gates of darkness: leading to hell ( Naraka ) 
which is fuil of pain and delusion, ] 


यः शास्त्रवि। धमुत्खज्य WU कामकारतः ॥ 
न स लिंद्धिमवासोति न सुल न परां गतिम्‌ ॥२३॥ 
ANID 25. 

a: Who शाह्रविधि the ordinance of the Shastra 
TWIT setting aside कामकारतः under the impulse 
of desire AH acts रा: he सिद्धिम्‌ to perfectior न not 
अरानोति atiains q nor सुख happiness q nor पररा 
Supreme aye Goal. 

He who, setting aside the ordinances of the 
Shastra, acts under the impulse of desire, 
attains not to perfection, nor happiness, nor 
the Gaal Supreme, ] 

| Perfection : fitness for attaining the end of man. ] 


—AND THE NON-DIVINE ATTRIBUTES 305 


नस्माच्छाखं प्रमाण ते कायोकायेब्यवस्थिती ॥ 
mar शासत्रविधानोक्त कमे कतुमिहार्हास ॥२४॥ 


XUL 24. 


तस्मात्‌ So कार्यांकायेब्यवास्यती in ascertaining what 
ought to be done and what ought not to be done 


शास्त्रम्‌ the Shastra ते thy प्रमाणं (be) authority zz 
" here शास्त्रविधानोच्ह what is said in the ordinances 
of the Shastra great having known कमे action कर्ते 
to do ग्रीस thou shouldst. 

So let the Shástra be thy authority in 
ascertaining what ought to be done and what 
ought not to be done. Waving known what 
is said in the ordinances of the Shástra, thou 
, Shouldst act here, 

[ Here: in this world. ] 


इति देवासुरसंपद्दिभागयोगो नाम पोडशोऽध्यायः॥ 
Fhe end of the Sixteenth Chapter designated 
THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIVINE 
AND THE NON-DIVINE ATTRIBUTES, 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ TATA SEAT: ॥ 
SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER. 


HJT SEN | 
ये शास्त्रविधिसुत्सज्य यजन्ते श्रद्धयान्विता:॥ 
ut निष्ठा तु का कृष्ण सत्वमाहो रजस्तमः ॥१॥ 

XVIL 1, 

gaat: Arjuna उवाच said: 

कृष्ण O Krishna ये who शास्रवियेम the ordinance .. 
of the Shástras उत्राज्य setting aside अद्वयाः with 
Shraddhà g but अन्विता: endued pe perform 
sacrifice तेषां their Agr condition का what Trae 
Saiva tH: Rajas ग्राही or तमः Tamas. 

Arjuna said : 

Those who, setting aside the ordinance of 
the Shástras, perform sacrifice with Shraddha, 
What is their condition, O Krishna? (Isit) 
Satva, Rajas or Tamas? 

[SAAE iai Y4ralihg: not that thev believe 
tie ordinances of the Shastras ty be "false. but 
out of laziness or thinking them to depend on too 
much exertion to perform strictly according to 
the Saastric ordinances, let them alone, and wor- 
ship the Gods, eudued with Shraddha, ] 


थधोभगवानुवाच ॥ 
त्रिविधा भवति श्रद्धा देहिनां सा स्वभावजा ॥ 
arak राजसो चेत्र तामसो चेति at टर ॥२॥ 


1-4] SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER 307 


XVII. 2. 

श्रीभगवात The Blessed Lord उवाच said : 

देहिनाम्‌ Of the embodied सास्विकी the Sátvic राजसी 
the Rájasic तामसी the Tàmasic च and gf thus 
fatrar threefold एवं indeed sgr the Shraddhá 
भवाते is सा which स्वभावजा (is) inherent in ( their ) 
nature gra of it q hear (thou). 

The Blessed Lord said: 

Threefold is the Shraddha of the embodied, 
which is inherent in their nature,—the Sátvic, 
the Rajasic and the Tamasic. Do thou 
hear of it, 


[ Snherent...nature: born of their past Samskara. 
Ji—the threefold Shraddhá. ] 


त्याजुरूपा सवेस्य श्रद्धा भर्वात भारत 
` श्रद्धामयोऽयं पुरुषो यो यच्छ छः स एव सः Uk 
AVES 5: 

aag O descendant of Bharata uger of each 
sper Shraddha णतव्बानुरूषा according to the consti- 
tution of (liis) heart wary is आयस्‌ the पुरुषः man 
श्रद्धागय: consists of (his) Shraddha a: he grege: 
what (his) Shraddha is रा: be एव verily q: that (¬). 

The Shraddhá of each is according to the 
constitution of bis heat, O descendant of 
Bharata; the man consists of bis Shraddhá. 
We verily is what his Shraddha ts, 

( Constitution—the specific tendencies or Samsa 


káras. | 


यजन्ते सात्विका देवान्यत्षसज्ञांसि राजसा: I 
प्रेतान्भूतगर्शाश्वान्ये यजन्ते तामसा जना: e 


ofS THE ENQUIRY INTO THE— [ Chap. 17 


NVI. 4. 
सात्विकाः Såtvic men ara the Devas यजन्ते 
~. राजसा: the Rajasic यक्तरतक्षांसि the Yakshas 
Rakshasas ger the others तामसाः the 
sar men yara the Pretas yanura the 


; 
ani i 


Tamasic 
Hoss of Bhutas sand aseq worship 
pe e 
Sitvic men worship the Devas; Rájasic, 
thea Vakshas and Râkshasas; the others— 


t 
the Támasic men—the Pretas and the hosts 


अरास्त्रवाहित घोरे तप्यन्ते ये तपो जना: ॥ 

a * e£ 
दस्माहकारसयुक्ताः काम्रागबलान्वताः ॥५॥ 
HITT: शरोरस्थं REIR: di 
मां चेदांतःशरीरखं तान्विद्धासुरनिश्चयान्‌ ॥६॥ 

XVIE 5. 6. 

देमाहेकारपंयुस्काः Given to ostentation and egoism 
कऋमरागबलालन्विता: possessed with the power of lust 
gend atiachment ये who अचेठ्स: senseless sap: men 
waga in the body wr3mrmmm all the organs अत्‌ः= 
शचरस्थम्‌ that dwelis in the body within मास Me 
wp audeam: torturing ्रशास्त्राविहितस not enjoined 
by the Saasiras घोरम्‌ severe तष: austerity तज्यन्ते 
practise ate them आसुरानश्वयान to be of Asuric 
resoive Ti Know. 2 

Those men who practise severe austerities 
not enjoined by the Shastras, given to 
estentation and egoism, possessed with the 
power of lust and” attachment, torturing, 
senseless as they are, all the organs in the 
body, and Me dwelling in the body within न 
knuw them to be of Asuric resolve 


4-8] | —THREEFOLD SHRADDHA 309 


[ Ausferziies—which cause pain to himself and 
to other living beings. 


Possessed...,,.attachment—may also be interpreted 
as, ‘possessed of lust, ajlachment and power.’ 


All the organs of the body: the aggregate of all 
the elements composing the body. ] 


आहारस्वापे wae त्रिविधो भचति प्रियः॥ 


यक्षस्तपस्तथा दाने तेषां भदसिमं rur ॥७॥ 
AVI 7. 

"Qe By each of them आदि also आहारः food 
g indeed fafay: threefold [प्रिय्‌ः liked अवाति is सथा 
as also ug: Yajna qq: austerity ery alms-giving 
«r and तेषां their इमस्‌ this Ye distinction yer do 
thou hear. 

The food also which is liked by each of 
them is threefold, as also Yajna, austerity and 
alms-giving. Do thou hear this, their 
distinction. 


आयुःसत्वबलारोग्यसुखप्रीतिविवाधना: ॥ 
rear: Pau: स्थिरा हृद्या 
आहाराः स्रात्विकप्रिया: NEN 
: XVIL 8. 
© e sh 7 « 

शायु:सरइबलारोग्यसुस्वप्रीतिविव्धना: Those which 
augment wry: vitality «req energy wer strength 
mará health zm cheerfulness and प्रीति! appetite 
स्थाः which are savoury femur: oleaginous fear: 
substantial gar: agreeable आहारा! the foods arfera- 
प्रियाः (are) liked by the Sátvic. 

The foods which augment vitality, energy, 


strength, health, cheerfulness and appetite, 
23 


aic SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. i7. 


which are savoury and oleaginous, substantial 
and agreeable, are liked by the Sátvic. 


~ A EEE S 
कटुम्लखचसःत्युष्णश्त SMa ea रत्तावदाहनः i 
bay 
आहारा राजसस्येष्टा दुःखशोकामयप्रदा: NEN. 
XVII. 9. 

ऋदवम्ललवणात्युष्णतीक्ष्णरूकचविदाहिदः Those that 
३:६ GRIS bitter अम्लः sour लवणः saline ऋःत्युष्शः 
excessively hot fear: pungent ee: dry and विदाही 
burning दुःखशोकानयमदाः are productive of दुःखं 
rain शोकं grief and आमर्य disease आदारः the foods 
राजतस्य by the Rajasic ge: are liked. 

The foods that are bitter, sour, saline 
excessively hot, pungent, dry and burning, 
are liked by the Rajasic, and are productive ° 
of pain, grief and disease, 

| Exeessitely—should be construed with each of 
the seven, thus, excessively bitter, excessively sour, 
and so on. _ 


Ta de > N o. 
यातयाम गतरस पात yraa च यत It 

cx per "ceo : 
CALA चामेध्यं भोजन तामसप्रियम ॥१० 

XVII. ro. 

यांतयामम That which is stale maa. become- 
tasteiess qfq which is stinking पर्युषिते coaked over- 
nigh. उच्छिश which is refuse अमेध्ये impure ऋ and 
यत्‌ which भोजन the food तामसप्रियं liked by the 
Timasic. 

That which is stile and become tasteless, 
which is stinking and cooked over-night, 
which is refuse and impure, is the food liked 
by the Tamasic, 


$-13] SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER DLE 


[ S/ale—— F'átayámam-—lit. cooked three hours age. 
Refuse : left on the plate after à meal. ] 


अफलाकांत्षिभियेज्ञो विधिदष्टो य इज्यते d 
यष्टव्यमेवेति मनः समाधाय स सात्विक: ॥११॥ 
XVII. 11. 

अफलाकाक्षिमिः By men desiring no fruit यष्टव्य to 
be performed for its own sake एव only इति as 
भन: (their) mind समाधाय fixed fafqeg: as enjoined 
by ordinance थ: which यज्ञः Yajna इज्यते is per- 
termed सः that सात्विक: is Sátvic. 

That Yajna is Sátvic which is performed 
by men desiring no fruit, as enjoined by 
ordinance, with their mind fixed on the 
Yajna only, for its own sake. 
अभिसंध्राय तु फलं देभार्यमांपे चेव यत N 
` इज्यते भरतश्रेष्ठ ते यज्ञ विद्धि राजसम्‌ ॥१२॥ 

XVII. 13. 

फलं Fruit अभिसंधाय seeking for तु but wary for 
ostentation आपि also एव indeed = and we which 
aq is performed yeasts O best of the Bháratas ax 
that ay Yajna asa Rajasic fate know (it to be). 

[hat which is performed, O best of the 
Bháratas, seeking for fruit and for ostenta- 
tion, know it to be a Rájasic Yajua, 


विशिहीनमखष्टानं मं्रहीनमदक्तिणाम्‌ ॥ 
श्चद्धाविरहितं ast तामस uie ॥१३॥ 
XVII. r3. 
विधिहीनं Without keeping to ordinance EREE] 
w which no food is distributed मंत्रहदीन॑ which is 


412 THE ENQUIRY INTO THE— [ Chap. 77. 
devoid of Mantras gefaar which is devoid of gifts 
wgra devoid of Shraddha ag Yajna emm 
Yimasic पारिचक्षते is said to be. 

The Wajna performed ` without beed to 
nrdinance, in which no food ts distributed, 
which is devoid of Mantras, gifts, and 
ShraddháZ. is said to be Tàmasic. 


danena yi शोचमाजवम ॥ 
बरझचयमहिसा च शारीर तप उच्यते ॥१७॥ 
XVIL i4. : 

देवाईइेजसस्मासपूजनं Worship of the Devas, the 
t«ice-born, the Gurus and the wise शौच purity 
श्राजवं straightforwardness agra continence अटिसा 
ron-injuriousness = and शारीरं of the body तप: the 
austerity उच्यते is called. 

Worship of the Devas, the twice-born, the ' 
Gurus and the wise, purity, straightforward- 
mess, continence, and mnon-injuriousness' are 
called the austerity of the body. 


अनुदेगकरं वाक्यं सत्यं प्रियहितं च यत्‌ ॥ 
खाध्यायाभ्यसनं चेव वाङ्मयं तप उच्यते ॥१५॥ 
XVIL rs. ni 
अतुद्रेगकरम्‌ Causing no vexation सत्ये true fya- 
हितं agreeable and beneficial ऋ as also यत which 


वाक्यं speech स्वाध्यायाभ्यसनं regular study of the 
Vedas च gq and also वाङमय of speech qq: the 
austerity उच्यते is said (to form ). 


| Speech which causes no vexation, and is 
(rue, as also agreeable and beneficial, and 


13-17} | —THREEFOLD SHRADDHA 213 


regular study of the Vedas,—these are said 
to form the austerity of speech. 


[Speech to be an austerity must form an 
invariable combination of all the four attributes 
mentioned in the sloka; if it lacks in one or other 


of them, it will no longer be an austerity of 
speech. | 


मनःप्रसादः सौम्यत्वं मोनमात्मविनित्रह: ॥ 
भावसंशुद्धिरित्येतत्तपो मानसमुच्यते ॥१६॥ 
XVII. 16. 

मनःप्रसादः, Serenity of mind सौम्यत्वं kindliness 
मोने silence आ्मविनि्ह: self-control भावसंशद्रिः 
honesty of motive इति waa this मानस mental तपः 
the austerity उच्यत is called. 

Serenity of mind, kindliness, silence, self- 
control, honesty of motive,—this is called the 
mental austerity. 


[ Selence—Mounam—is the result of the control 
of thought so faras it concerns speech. Or it may 


mean, the condition of the Muni, 1, e., practice of 
meditation. | 


WAT परया तसे तपस्तब्रिविथं नरे: ॥ 
अफलाकांज्षिभियुक्ते: सात्विकं पारिचचते॥१७॥ 
ह XVIL 7. 

अफलाकांतज्षिमिः Desiring no fruit युक्त: by steadfast 
‘qc: (by) men परया with great sgar (with) Shraddha 
aw practised तत that त्रिविध threefold «qq: austerity 
amd Sátvic qf is said (to be). 

This threefold austerity practised by 
steadfast men, with great Shraddha, desiring 
no fruit, is said to be Sátvic, 

| Stead fast—unailected in. success and failung: $ 


514  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [Chap. 17, 
oo * ea A 
सत्कारमानपूजाथ तपा दभन चव यत्‌ ॥ 
क्रियते Mee प्रोक्तं राजसं चलमश्षुवम्‌ NLS 
XVII. 18 

सत्कारमानपूजाय With the object of gaining wel- 
come, honour and worship देभेन with ostentation न 
धुव 221 ag which qq: austerity क्रिवते is practised gg 
here चलं unsiable spW4Y transitory qa that शजरू 
Réjasic प्रत्त is said (to be) 

That austerity which is practised with the 
^biect of gaining welcome, honour and wor- 
ship, and with ostentation, is here said to be 
Kuasic, unstable and transitory 

Weia osieuration: for mere show, hypocritically, 
wilh no sincere belief 


fere—is explained also in the sense of ‘of this 
world, i. e., yielding fruit only in this world. 1 


मढग्राहेणात्मनो यत्पीडया कयते तपः ॥ 
RARAN वा तत्तामसमुदाहृतम्‌ ॥ १६॥ 
XVIL 19. 
samsu Our of a foolish notion sraa: of self 


{rear wik iorure प्रस्य of another उच्सादना५ for 
tie purp Oi ruining qz or यत्‌ which qu: auster ity 


a 


TENT is practised तत that ary Dímasic yerga 
:& ceclared (to bel 2 


sua. austerity which is practised out of 
a foolish notion, with self-torture or for the 
purpose of ruining another, is declared to be 
dd a e 
amasic, 


दातव्यमिति wert दीयतेऽनुपकारिणे ॥ 
इर कास च पाचे च तदानं सात्विक स्मृतम्‌ ॥२०॥ 


18-22 | SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER 315 


XVII. 20. 

देशे In a fit place काले in a fit time = and «r3 
toa worthy person = and दांतव्य to give is right 
इति with this idea sraqeprftat to one who does no 
service (in return) sg which दाने gift दीयते is 
given qx that दानं gift सात्विकं Satvic «wq is held 
to be. 

To give is right,—gift given with this 
idea, to one who does no servicein return, 
in a fit place and time, and to a worthy 
person, that gift is held to be Sátvic. 


" 


[ Who... return: one “who cannot, or ‘wha 
though able is not expected to return the good. | 


यत्तु धत्युपकाराय फलमुद्श्य चा पुनः ॥ 
दीयते च परिझिषए्टं तद्दानं राजसं स्मृतम ॥२१॥ 
XVII. 21. 

यत्‌ What g and प्रत्युपकारार्थं with a view ta 
receiving in return फले the fruit gry looking for 
ay or ga: again प्रिक्रिश reluctantly दीयते is given सत्र 
that दाने gift राजस Rijasic- egy is held to be. 

And what is given with a view te receiving 
in return, or looking for the fruit, or reluc- 
tantly, that gift is held to be Rajasic. 


sarata यद्दानमपात्रेक्यश्च दीयते ॥ 
AAHARAM A तचामसमुदादहतस्‌ ॥२२॥ 
XVII. 22. 
अदेशकाले At the wrong place or time अपात्रेभ्यः 
to unworthy persons ग्रसत्क्रतं without regard अवज्ञात 
with disdain यत that दान gift दीयते is given तत. that 
arma Tamasic उदाहृतं is declared to be, 


» 


31€ THE ENQUIRY INTO THE— [Chap: 17. 


The gift that is given at the wrong place 
or time, to unworthy persons, without regard 
a with disdain, that is declared to be 


Pamasic. 7 

Bus F^ d, a LN. am - o Bh 
मों तत्सदिति निर्देशे ब्रह्मणस्विविध: eua: ॥ 

क ' FM Og " , 
प्राह्मगास्तेन चदाश्य BAST वाहता: पुरा Hid 
XVII. 23. 

-t Om qe Tat qu Sat इति this ag: of Brah- 
man त्रिविधः triple निर्देश: designation स्मृतः has been 
Jeciared हेन्‌ by that agrare the Brahmanas च and 
Wap: the Vedas spand aat: the Yajnas बुरा of old 
fafeqnr were made 

‘Om, Tat, Sat"-this has been declared 
to be the triple designation of Brahman. 
By that were made of old the Brahmanas and 
tne Vedas and the Yajnas : 

C Om. Tar, Saf: Om is the principal name of 
tne Lord, because it means all that is manifest and 
the beyond. It also means “ Yes Taf means 
"Tha: 3 the Indefinable, that which only can be 
escribed indireetiy as “ That which.” Saf means 
Reality; which is ever permanent in one mode of 
being. | 


he FN I PN ‘ 
४७३1४ मत्यदाहत्य TASH TMA: Ik ^ 
प्रवतेन्ते विधानोक्ताः सततं ब्रह्मवादिनाम ॥२४॥ 
| XVIL 24. | 
सस्मात्‌ Therefore af Om इति उदाहत्य Za uttering 
#ह्ववादरना ot the followers of the Vedas विवानोच्छा 
aS enjoined in the ordinances agarana dfaa: the 


acts of Yajna, gift and austerity सूतते alw ays प्रवतन्ते 
proceed 


= 


22-27 | | —THREEFOLD SHRADDHA 317 


Therefore uttering Om, acts of Yajna, gift 
and austerity of the followers of the Vedas 


always proceed, as enjoined in the ordinances. 
? 


तदित्यनभिसंधाय फलं यज्ञतपःक्रियाः ॥ 
दानक्रियाच्व विविधा: कियन्ते मोचकांचिभिः २५ 
j XVIL 25. 
aa Tat इति thus (uttering) wat the fruit अ्रनभिसंघाय 
without aiming at मोजकांतच्षिमि: by the seekers of 
Moksha विविधाः various यज्ञतप:क्रिया: acts of Yajna 


and austerity, दानक्रिया: acts of gift च and क्रिबन्ले 
are performed. . 


Uttering Tat, without aiming at fruits, are 
the various acts of Yajna, austerity and gift, 
performed by the seekers of Moksha. 

M. ४ ७. क 
VR साधुभावे च सदित्येतत्मयुज्यते ॥ 
प्रशस्ते कर्मणि तथा सच्छब्दः पाथे युज्यते ॥२६॥ 

XVII. 26. 

ary 0 Partha सङ्गावे in the sense of reality साधुन 
भावे in the sense of goodness w= and ga Sat 
इत्ति as एतत्‌ ऽ प्रयुज्यते is used तथा so also प्रशस्ते 
auspicious कर्मणि in (the-sense of ) an act = and 
aa, Satayse: the word युज्यते is used. 

The ‘word Sat is used in the sense of 
reality and of goodness; and so alse, O 
Partha, the word Sat is used in the sense of 
an auspicious act. ` 


यशे तपासे दाने च स्थिति: सदिति चोच्यते d 
wu चेच तद्वर्थीयं सदित्येवाभिधीयते ॥२७॥ 


Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


॥ srgra rS ES: N 
^ EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. 


अजुन उवाच di 
संन्यासस्य महाबाहो तत्वमिच्छामि वेदितुम ॥ 
त्यागस्य च STAT परथक्षशिनिपूदन ॥१॥ 
Ne. 3 
अजुन: Arjuna उवाच said: 
^ षीकेश O Hrishikesha महांबाही' O m ighty-arraed 

केशिनिषुदव O slayer of Keshi संन्यासस्य of Sannyssa 
त्यागस्य of Tyaga * as also qwe severally तत्व 
the truth वेदितुं to know इच्छामि 1 desire. 

Arjuna said : 

| desire to know severally, O mighty-armed, 
the truth of Sannydsa, O Hrishikesha, as 
also of Tyaga, O slayer of Keshi. 

[ Sannydsa and Zydga both mean renunciation. 

Keshi—was an Asura. ] ^ 

kad 
° श्रीभगवाडुचाच ॥ 
काम्यानां कर्मणां न्यासे संन्यास कवयो fers: ॥ 
खसर्वेकमफलस्यार्ग प्राइस्त्यागं विचक्षणाः ॥२॥ 
RNIN ३ 

श्रीभगवान The Blessed Lord उवाच sai d: 

कवयः The sages काम्यानां of Kámya कमा (ol) 
actions न्यास the renunciation संन्यासं (as) Sannvasd 


as) THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18. 
fez: understan d विचक्षणाः the wise सर्वकर्मफलत्याग 
donment of the fruits of all works त्याग (as) 


So: aban 
aga STR: declare. 
Le Blessed Lord said : 
The renunciation of Kámya actions, the 
coges understand as Sannyása; the wise 
‘are the abandonment of the fruits of all 


"aa 7 d^ zh 
ee ee Thad te ea 


{ 


1 


+ 
- 


a as Trå 
v ores as lvága. 


Kenya—which are accompanied with a desire 


त्याज्य दोषवदित्येके कम प्राइमनीषिण:॥ 
यशदानतपः कमे न त्याज्यमिति चापरे ॥३॥ 
SVIIL. इ. 

पके Some «eu: philosophers कर्म (all) action 
Amaan 3६ an evil इति that त्याज्यम should be 
reincaished gre: declare अपरे others @ whilst 
थयजदानतषःकमं the work of Yajna, gift and austerity 

no: त्याज्य should be relinquished gfq that. 

Some philosophers declare that all action 
Sas be relinquished as an evil, whilst 
otoers say) that the work of Yajna, gift 
aad susterity, should not be relinquished. 


Rai शुरु मे तत्र त्यागे भरतसत्तम ॥ ^ 
त्यया हि पुरुषव्याघ त्रिविधः संप्रकीर्तित: uen 
AXVIIL 4. 

ORERTHU O best of the Bharatas पुरुषव्यांच्र O tiger 
e men तत्र about that स्यामे in relinquishment के 
trom Me निश्चय the final truth शशु hear arr: re. 
linguisnment f for त्रिबिधः of three ki [ rat | 

: po iads संप्रकतेत: 
«A5 vec declared (to be). 


2-7] —IN RENUNCIATION 321 


Hear from Me the final truth about 
relinquishment, O best of the Bharatas. For 
relinquishment has been declared to be oí 
three kinds, O tiger of*men. 


यश्दानतपः कमे न त्याज्यं RANT तत di 
यज्ञो दाल तपञ्चेव पावनानि मनीषिणाम ॥५॥ 
‘ XVII. 5. 

यज्ञषदाततष: Yajna, gift and austerity कर्म the work 
न्न not ताज्यं should be relinquished gg it कायम 
should be performed एव indeed gg: Yajna दानं 
giit सपः austerity = and एव indeed मरनीषिणां to the 
wise पावनांने are purifying, 

The work of Yajna, gift and austerity 
should not be relinquished, but it should in- 
deed be performed; (for) Yajna, gift and 
austerity are purifying to the wise. 


varai तु कमारि संगं त्यक्त्वा फलानि च॥ 
क्रतेब्यानोति मे पार्थ निश्चितं मतसुत्तमय ue 
XVIII 6. 

पार्थ O Partha एतानि these कर्माणि works अयि even 
g but संगम attachment फलानि the fruits च and 
wera leaving qefa should be performed zfq 
such मे My निश्रयं certain उत्तम best qd conviction. 

But even these works, O Partha, should be 
performed, leaving attachment and the fruits ; 
—such is My best and certain conviction, 


नियतस्य तु संन्यासः कमशो नोपपद्यते ॥ 


ओहाक्ञस्य परित्यागस्तामसः परिकीर्तितः ॥७॥ 
XVII. 7. 
नियतस्य Of obligatory HAY: (of) action ल but 


437 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 18. 
gara: the renunciation sp not उपपद्यते is proper 
मतात. from delusion तस्य of the same qmm 
--andonment तामसः Tàmasic qfiattfad: is declared 


5 


te be}. 
But the renunciation of obligatory action 


is not proper. Abandonment of the same 


frem delusion is deciared to be Tamasic. 


‘Since it is parifving in the case of the ignorant. | 


दुःखामित्येव यत्कमे कायज्केशमयात््यजेत्‌ di 
स्र कृत्वा राजसं art नेतर त्यागफलं TAT प्या 
XVIII. 8. 

दुःखं { 1: 15) painful इलि because एच only कायः 
yonma irom fear of bodily trouble यत्‌ which 
कर्म action त्यजेत relinquishes सः he qwa Rájasic 
aay relinguishment कृत्वा performing त्यागफलं the 
imt of relinquishment q not एव indeed waa (he} 

जाड, 

He who. from fear of bodily trouble, 
relinquishes action, because it is painful, thus 
erfarming a  Rájasic relinquishment, he 
ybtains not the fruit thereof, 

| Fruit, i. e.. Moksha, which comes out of the 
renunciation of all actions accompanied with 
wisdom. | i 

es e er a f£ _ €& 
कायःमत्यव यत्कम [नयत ऋयतउऊजुन ॥ 
संग त्यक्त्वा फलं चेव स त्यागः सात्विको मतः ६ 

XVII. 9. 
अजुन O Arjuna संग attachment फलं fruit च एव 
and स्यक्त्वा leaving कार्यम्‌ it ought to be done इत्ति 
because g4 only यत्‌ which नियत obligatory कर्म 


t 


tr 


~ 


2 


7-11 | EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER 323 


action क्रियते is performed स: such त्याग: relinquish- 
ment सात्विकः Sátvic मतः is regarded as. 

When obligatory work is performed, O 
Arjuna, only becauge it ought to be done, 
leaving attachment and fruit, such relinquish- 
inent is regarded as Satvic. 


न देण्यकरालं कमे कुशले नानुषञ्ञते ॥ 
त्यागी शत्दसमाविशे मेधावी छिन्नसंशयः ॥१०॥ 
XVIIL 10. 

Sepe .Endued with Satva मेघावी with a steady 
understanding खिनसेशयः with his doubts dispelled 
amy the relinquisher अकुशलं disagreeable qu 
action न्‌ not [X hates qua to an agreeable one 
न nor yaga is attached. 

The relinquisher endued with Satva and 8 
-steady understanding and with his doubts 
dispelled, hates not a disagreeable work nor 
is attached to an agreeable one. 


यस्तु कमफलत्यागी स त्यागीत्यभिधीयते ॥११॥ 
E XVIII + 11. 

देहभदी Jy an embodied being ग्रशेषतः entirely 
कर्माशि actions amk to relinquish न not हि indeed 
शाक्य Can he य: ic q but कर्मफलत्यागी relinguisher 
of the fruits of action स: he त्यागी relinquisher इति 
thus afergrad is called. — 


नहि पेहभता शक्यं व्यक्तं कमागरयशेषत:॥ 


Actions cannot be entirely relinquished by 
au embodied being, but he who relinquishes 
the fruits of action is called a relinquisher. 

4 


524 THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18. 
+ * fafat e e 4 
gauai मिल ज जिवि waar: फलम्‌ ॥ 
+t” Heare [-] e. 
भपवत्यत्यागिनां प्रेत्य न तु संन्यासिनां काचित्‌ १२ 
XVIII. ~ 12, 

ऋत्यागिना To non-relinquishers tray after death 
awe disagreeable gë agreeable famy mixed = and 
Farry ihreefold gaq: of action फल fruit भवाति 
accrues तु but संन्यातिनां to relinquishers क्वचित ever 
Pax 

The threefold fruit of action-—disasreeable 
azz-eeable and  mixed,—accrues to non= 
reinguishers after death, but never to 


r25nquishers. 


पंचेतानि मद्दाबाहो कारणानि नियोध मे N 
सांख्ये Hate शोक्तानि सिद्धये स्वेकमेशाम १३ 
AVIIL 13 : 

मशाबाहों Q mighty-armed ghe in the wisdom 
warg which is the end of ali action सवकमणा of 
. works सिद्धये for the accomplishment प्रोक्तांने as 
zec.ared एतानि these षंच five क्ारणानि causes Ed 
trom Me [नेबोध learn 

Learn from Me, O mighty-armed, these 
five causes for the accomplishment of all 
worxs as declared in the wisdom which is the 
ena of all action :— 


_ Wisdom: Sénkhya —literally, in which all the 
tings that are to be known are expounded, there- 
1216, the highest wisdom. ] 


अधिष्ठानं तथा कतो करणां च पृथग्चिधम ॥ 





६2-16] —IN RENUNCIATION 325 


AVIL ra. 

अधिष्ठान The body तथा also mar the agent 
quay various करण the senses विविधा: of a manifold 
kind qwe different Ney functions छात्र of these 
qaq the fifth देवे the presiding divinity * एव 
and also. 

The body, the agent, the various senses, 
the different functions of a manifold kind | 
and the presiding divinity, the fifth of these 


| Presiding divinity: Each ofthe senses has its 
god who presides over il, i. e, by whose aid it: 
discharges its own functions; e. g., the Aditya (Sun) | 
15 the presiding divinity of the eye, by whose aid it 
sees and acts; and so on with the other senses, | 


शरीरवाडःमनोभियेत्कमे प्रारभते नरः ॥ 

^ . की AXE a च 

न्याय्य वा वपरात वा पचत तस्य हतचः NVM 
XVIII 15. 

"qc A man शरीरवाङ्मनोभिः by ( his) body, speech 
and mind यत whatever न्याय्यं right वा or विषरीतं the 
reverse कमे action प्रारभत performs uq these पंच 
five तस्य its देतव: causes | 

Whatever action a man, performs by his 
body, speech and mind—-whether right or 
the reverse—these five are, its causes. 


तत्रैचं सति कतोरमात्मानं केवलं तु य: ॥ 


पश्यत्यक्ृतबुद्धित्वान्न स पश्यति zu ॥१६॥ 
XVIII. 16. 
एवं Thus साति being तत्र there (the case) केवलं 
the absolute आत्मानं the Self तु verily अकृतबुद्धित्वात 
through a non-purified understanding य: who कतार 
as the agent पश्यति looks upon स; he दुमतिः of 
perverted mind न not पश्यति sees. 


24 


| 


$33 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITY (Chap. 18.. 
Such being the case he who, through ze 


non-purified understanding, looks upon: his: 
Self, the Absolute, as the agent —he of per- 


verted mind sees not. 


यस्य नाहंकतेर भावो वुद्धियेस्य न लिप्यते ॥' 
इत्वापि रू इमाँलोकान्न efe. er ferrent ॥ १७ 
XVIH. 17 
यस्य For whom såga: of egoism भाव: the notion: 
aq not यस्क whose बुद्ध intelligence x; not tercer 
is afected सः he इमान. these लाकानू peoples zer: 
killing अपि theugh « not दशन्तः kills ना nor fend 


is bound 
He who is free from the notion of egoism,. 
whose intelligence is not affected. (by good 
or evil), though he kill these peoples, he kill 
not, nes, bound ( by the action ) 
He whigse self-consciousness, by the force of 
long, strenuus" nd properly-trained self-con-. 
identified with Brahman, and: 


centration, is eve 
ises of action as mentioned im. 


mot with the five car . 

Sloka 34,—he whpse self-conociousnesw» never 
mistakes. itself with th . 
even when performing P2yS!calacts;—he is-ever free: 


from the taint of aerie” n. | R 

















oO e. 

qu Hem mel 

z VIII. 18 

araa The knowendge Far the Known वरिसाता 
the knower त्रिविधाः 4 the threefold phare the 
canse of action करणं the instrument कम the object 
कता the agent इतिः thae जिविधः threefold कर्मसंग्रहः 


16-26 ] EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER . 327 


The knowledge, the known and the knower 
form the threefold cause of action. The 
instrament, the object and the agent are the 
threefold basis of action. 


| Basis—because the threefold action inheres in 
these three. ] . 
"n 


* © e A 
ज्ञानं कमे च कतो च त्रिचेव गुणभेदतः ॥ 
प्रोच्यते गुण संख्याने यथावच्छृणु तान्यपि NEN 
XVIII. 19. 

शुणसंण्याने In the (science of) enumeration of 
the Gunas ( Sánkhya-philosophy ) zm knowledge 
कर्म action wand कतो agent s and yaaa: from 
the distinction of Gunas जिधा of three kinds एव 
‘only qiea are declared ( to be) तानि them अपि also 
यथावत duly wrer hear. 

, Knowledge, action and agent are declared 
in the Sdukhya philosophy to be of three 
kiuds only, from the distinction of Gunas: 
hear them also duly. 

[ Sdukhya: the Science of the Gunas by Kapila. 
Though there is a conflict in the matter of supreme 
Truth—the oneness ornon-duality of Brahman— 
petween the Vedanta and tne Sànkhya, yet the 
Sánkya view is given here, because it is an authority 
on the science of Gunas 


Duly—described according to the Science, 
according to reason. | 


स्ेभूतेषु येनेकं भावमव्ययमीच्षृते ॥ 

अविभक्तं विभक्तेषु तञ्ज्ञानं विद्धि सात्विकम्‌ २० 
XVIII. 20 

' येन By which विभक्तेषु in the separate सवभूतेषु in 

l| beings अविभक्त inseparate "एकं the one spem 


258 THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18. 


~ destructible भावं substance Safer is seen तत that 
काने knowledge सात्विकं to be Satvic विद्धि know ` 
( thou ). 

That by which the One Indestructible 
Substance is seen in all beings, inseparate In 
the separated, know that knowledge to be 
Satvic. i 

7 Inseparate : undifferentiated ; permeating all.] 
वृथक्त्वेन तु यज्ज्ञाने नानाभावान्पृथग्विधान N 
afa सर्वेषु भूतेषु तञ्ज्ञानं विद्धि राजसम्‌ ॥२१॥ 

XVIII. 2r. 

पृथक्त्वेन As different from one another g but 
za which ज्ञानं knowledge aag inal भूतेषु (in) 
beings पृथाग्विधान of distinct kinds नानाभावान various 
entities qfap knows तव्‌ that ज्ञान knowledge राजस 
as Rájasic वि know (thou). 

But that knowledge which sees in all 
beings various entities of distinct kinds as 
different from one another, know thou that 
knowledge as Rajasic, 

| Eniliies: Souls. 


Different from one another: Different in different 
bodies. ] j , 


यत्तु छृत्सवदेकास्मन कार्ये सक्तमहेतुकम्‌ ॥ 


झतत्त्वाथवदल्पं च तत्तामसमुदाहतम्‌ ॥२२॥ 
XVIII. 22. 
यत Which g but एकस्मिन्‌ to one single कार्य 
effect Fag as if it were the whole @ confined 
Wea without reason अतत्त्वाथवत without founda- 
tion in truth अल्प trivial * and तत्‌ that तामसं 
-lámasic उदाहृतं is declared (to be ), 


20-25 | —IN RENUNCIATION 32५ 


Whilst that which is confined to one single 
effect as if it were the whole, without reason, 
without foundation in truth, aud trivial, —that 
is declared to be Támasic. 

One single effect: such as the body,—thinking 
it to he the Self, ] 


[नयतं संगरहितमरागद्धेषतः BAT ॥ 


अफलप्रेप्सुना कमे यत्तत्सात्विकमुच्यते ॥२३॥ 
XVII. 23. i 
अफलप्रेप्सना Dy one not desirous of the fruit 
नियतं ordained 'संगरहिंतं free from attachment अराग- 
aq: without love or hatred कृतं done थत which 


कम action तत्‌ that सात्विक Sátvic उच्यते is declared 
(to be) 


An ordained action, done without love or 
hatred, by one not desirous of the fruit, and 
free from attachment, is declared to be Sitvic, 


यत्तु MAGAT कम साहंकारेण वा पुनः ॥ 


क्रियते बहुलायासं तद्राजसमुदाहृतम्‌ ॥२४॥ 
XVII, 24. 

कामम्सुना Dy one desiring desires साइकारेण with 
self-conceit ar or बहलायासं with much effort यत 
which तु hut पुनः again करम the action क्रियसे is per- 
formed aa that राजसं Rajasic उदाहृतं is declared 
( to be), 

But the action which is performed desiring 
desires, or with self-conceit, and with much 
effort, is declared to be Rajasic. 


अनुबन्धं wq हिसामनपेक्ष्य च पोरुषस ॥ 
मोहादारभ्यते कम तत्तामसमूदाह्तस ॥२५॥ 


330 . SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 18. 


VIE: 226, 
sagar The consequence qq loss ( of power and 
wealth | fear injury (to others ) पोरू्षं (one’s own ) 
titty « and अनपेक्ष्य without heeding मोहात 
trough delusion यत which कर्मं action आरभ्यते is 
undertaken लत that तामसं Tamasic उच्यते is de- 
cared i to be). 
That action is declared to be Támasic' 
which is undertaken through delusion, with- 
ut heed to the consequence, loss (of power 
ard weaith 2, injury (to others) and (one's 
cwn ) ability 


मुक्तसंगोऽनहेवादी धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः ॥ 
सिद्धसिद्धोनिर्विकार: कर्ता सात्विक उच्यते २६- 
XVI. 26. 

l मुक्तसेगः: Who is freed from attachment अनहेवादी 
ron-egotistic धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः endued with fortitude 
and enthusiasm सिद्धघासिद्धश्चोः in success or failure 
निर्विकारः unaffected कतो an agent सात्विकः Satvic 
उच्यते is called. 

An agent who is free from attachment, 
non-egotistic, endued with fortitude and 
enthusiasm, and unaffected in success or 
failure, is called Sátvic. i 


n 


रागी कमफललप्रेप्सु लेब्धो इहसात्मकोष्शुचिः ॥ 
इपशाकान्वतः कता राजसः परिकीर्तित: ॥२७॥ 
XVII 27 


शशी Passionate कमफलप्रप्छुः desiring for the fruits 
€f action लुब्धः greedy हिंसात्मकः malignant अशा चि: 
ए इषशाकान्वतः (easily ) affected by elation 


25-29] EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER  . 331 


or dejection कवी (such) an agent राजसः Rajasic 
परिकीर्तितः is called. | 

He who is passionate, desiring for the fruits 
cf action, greedy, maljgnant, impure, easily 
elated or dejected, such an agent is called 
Rájasic. | 

| Elated ar dejected—at the success or failure of 
she action in which he is engaged. | है 


HH: THA: स्तब्ध: शठो नेष्कृतिको प्लस: ॥ - 
बिषादी दीघेसूत्री च कतो तामस उच्यते ॥२प्॥ 
. XVHL 28. | 
gak: Unsteady stg: vulgar स्तब्धः arrogant 
शठः dishonest नेष्कातिकः malicious waa: indolent 
"बषादी desponding taas} procrastinating च and 
कर्ता (such) an agent araa: Tamasic sega is 
called. 
. Unsteady, vulgar, arrogant, dishonest, 
malicious, indolent, desponding and pro- 
crastinating, such an agent is called Tamasic, 
- गट. LÀ am Ss 
qua giaa शुणतास्त्राचथ सरा n 
प्रोच्यमानमरोषेश पृथक्त्वेन 'घनेजय ॥२६॥ 
XVIII. 29. 
घर्षेजय O Dhananjaya gÈ: of intellect Yà: of 
fortitude चु एव and also ura: according to the 6;unas 
त्रिविध triple पृथङ्त्वेच severally अशेषेण exhaustively 
प्रोच्यमानं as I declare भेदं the distinction wmg hear 
(thou). "VE 
Hear thou the triple distinction of intellect 
and fortitude, according to the Gunas, as I 
declare them  exhaustively aud severally, 
O Dhananjaya. | 


^ 


332 THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [ Chap. 18, 


| Drananjzve: the conqueror of wealth—human 
and divine, earthly and celestial; an epithet of 


Arjuna. 

cate च fate च काय़ोकार्ये भयामये ॥ 

बंध मोचं च या वेत्ति बुद्धि: सा पाथ सात्विकी ३० 
XVIIL ३०. 

arg O Partha ggf the path of work नियाच t he 
pail of renunciation =f and कायाकायें right and 
wrong action भयाभये fear and fearlessness ञे 
bondage मोक्षं liberation च and या which सि knows 
सा that सात्विका Sütvic बुद्धिः intellect. 

That which knows the paths ef work and 
renunciation, right and wrong action, fear and 
fearlessness, bondage and liberation, that 
intellect, O Partha, is Sátvic. r 

_fear......Lideraiion—the cause of fear and 


the cause of fearlessness: similarly the cause of 
bondage and the cause of liberation. ] i 


पया SAHRA च काय चाकायमेव च ॥ 


अयधावत्प जानात ST सा पाथ राजसी ॥३ ?tl 
AXI. af 

पाय © Partha यया by which धर्म Dharma अधम 
Adharma कार्य right action अकाय wrong action = and 
अयथावत्‌ ina distorted way प्रजानाति apprehends सा 
८८:७3: राजसा Reiasic बुद्धः intellect 

That which has a distorted apprehension 
cf Dharma and its Opposite, and also of rieht 
ection and its opposite, that intellect, O 
Partha, is Riiasic 


अधस AAAS या मन्यते तमसाइता N 
Samia विपरीतांच्ध बुद्धिः सा पाथ तामसी ३२ 


o3 
C 


20-34] —IN RENUNCIATION 3 


XVII... 32. 

पार्थ O Partha या. which अधर्म dharma धर्म 
Dharma sfq as मन्यते regards सर्वार्थांन all things 
विपरीतान perverted = and तमसा in darkness आवता 
enveloped सा that give: intellect तामसी Tamasic. 

That which enveloped in darkness regards 
Adhayma as Dharma and views all things 
in a perverted light, that intellect, O Partha, 
is Támasic. 

JA यया धारयते मनःप्राशेन्द्रियक्रियाः ॥ 
योगेनाव्यभि्चारणया धतिः सा पार्थ सात्विकी ३३ 
NVI. 33. 

पार्थ O Partha गणेन through Yoga अ्रव्याभिचारिशया 
unswerving यया by which yar (by) fortitude FA 
प्राणन्द्रियाकियाः the functions of the mind, the Prana 
and the senses घारयते (one) regulates सा that श्रतिः 
, fortitude सात्विकी Satvic. 

The fortitude by which the functions of the 
mind, the Prana and the senses, O Partha, 
are regulated, that fortitude, unswerving 
through Yoga, is Sátvic. 
यया तु धमकामार्थान्‌ TAT 'धारयतेऽञ्जुन ॥ 
प्रसंगेन फलाकांदी way सा पाथ राजसो ॥३४॥ 

XVILL 34. 

पार्थ O Partha अजुन O Arjuna यया by which 
gat (by) fortitude q but धर्मकामार्थान Dharma, desire 
and wealth धारयते (one) regulates प्रसंगोन from attach- 
ment फलाकाक्षी desirous of the fruit of action सा 
that ufq: fortitude राजसी Rajasic. 


But the fortitude by which one regulates 
(one’s mind ) to Dharma, desire and wealth, 


^ 


224 CRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap. 18. 


Jess of the fruit of each from attachment, 


E 
eR 


toat fartitude, O Partha, is Rájasic. 


यदा wa wd शोके [eure मदमेव च ॥ 

a दिसुञ्चति giar छूतिः BT पाथ तामसी ॥३५॥ 
Shih 5$. 

दाय OC Partha gear: a stupid man यया by swhich 

ere sve: म्ये fear शोक grief विषाद despondency 

"à erweening conceit हव च and also q not 

fsumíx gives up ay that ufq: fortitude तामसी 


z 


Toat By which a stupid man does not give 
sleep, fear, grief, despondency and also 
(verweening conceit, that fortitude, O Partha, 
is Tamasic. 


uror 


Drs not give up sleep Erc.,—is inordinately 
Lied tu sleep dc, regarding these to be 
eT. ps per 


qa त्विदानी जिविधं शशु मे भरतषभ ॥ 


अभ्यासाद्रमते यत्र दुःखांतं च निगच्छति ॥३६॥ 
XVIII. 36. 

मरतधभ O bull of the Bháratas इदानीम now 
(ataa 127८९1010 gẹ happiness तु and म from Me 
ya ear यत्र in which अभ्यासात by habit रमते “earns 
z ¬ दुःखात the end of pain च and निगच्छाति 
4c) attains io 

And naw hear from Me, O bull of the 
Baíratas of the threefold happiness. That 
Happiness which one learns to enjoy by 
karit, aud by which one comes to the end 
of pain ; 


24-40] EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER 335 


थत्तदग्रे विषमिव परिणामेऽमृतोपमम्‌ I 


तत्छुखं सात्विकं प्रोक्तमात्मबुद्धि प्रसाद जम ॥३७॥ 
XVIIL 37. 

aa Which तत्‌ that अभे at first fay poison इव like 
परिणामे at the end अभूतापममस like nectar आत्मबुद्धि- 
प्रसादर्ज born of the purity of intellect due to Selt- 
realisation सत that we happiness सात्विक Satvic 
sih is declared (to be). 

That which is like poison at first, but like 
nectar at the end ; that happiness is declared 
to be Sátvic, born of the translucence of 
intellect due to Self-realisation. 


विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगायत्तदत्रेष्पउतोपमम ॥ 
परिणामे विषमिव तत्सुखं राजसं X dcl 
XVIII. 56. 

विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगाच From the contact of object with 
sense qa which ga that rp at first अमृतोपमम्‌ like 
neclar परिणामे at the end fag poison इव like qa 
that सुखं happiness राजसं Kajasic Vaz is declared 
(Lo be). 

That which arises from the contact of 
object with sense, at first like nectar, but at the 
end like poison; that happiness is declared to 
be Rájasic. 

[17 the end like poison—because it leads to the 


deterioration in strength, vigour, colour, wisdom, 
intellect, wealth and energy. ] 


थदग्रे argid च सुखं मोहनमात्मनः ॥ 
निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्यं तत्तामसमुदाह्नतम्र NEN 


द्र 


स 
+, 
नई 


THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18. 


t 


XVIII. 39. 

निद्रालस्यपनादोत्य Arising from निद्रा sleep आलस्ये 

ix haence and प्रमादः miscomprehension ye what 

nup happiness अय in the beginning अननंधे in the 

s¢cael च and grega: of self मोहन delusion qa that 
arag Tamasic उदाहूतं is declared (to be). 

(nat happiness which begins and results 
in seif-delusion arising from sleep, indolence 
avd miscomprehension, that is declared to be 
Tamasic 
न नद'म्त प्राथिव्यां वा दिवि देवेषु वा .पुन:॥ 

५ m NP. - as (o 6 Aa 
सत्व अङृतञजङझुक्त यदास: ATATA: ॥४०॥ 
XVIII. 40. 

giraf On earth दिति in heaven वा or देवेघु among 
the Jevas पुनः again तत्‌ that seq entity न्‌ no 
अन्य where is यत which एभिः (by) these yaa: born 
of Fax pany: (by ) three gÑ: (by) Gunas मुक्त 
Geveni Of स्यात is. 

Tiere is no entity on earth, or again in 
heaven among the Devas, that is devoid of 
tiese three Gunas, born of Prakriti, 


ब्राह्मणाक्षत्रियविशां झूदाणां च परंतप ॥ 
कमाण प्रावसक्ताच स्वभावम्रभवेशुशीः ॥४१॥ 
SOLUIT. use 


परंतप O scorcher of foes ब्राह्मणाक्षांचयविशा of 
Bratmanas, Kshatrivas and Vaishyas शद्राणा of 


Shudras च as also कमोणि duties स्वभावप्रभवेः born 
their) own nature ay: according to the Gunas 
HAAN are distributed 
Of Brdhimanas and Kshatriyas and Vaishyas 
aS aiso + Zuudras, O scorcher of foes, the 


50-43 | —IN RENUNCIATION 337 


duties are distributed according to the Gunas 
born of their own nature. 

[ According to tae Karma or habits and ten- 
dencies formed by degire, action and association 
in the past life manifesting themselves in the 
present as effects. Or, nature (Svaéhdva) may here 


mean the Naya made up of three Gunas, the 
Prakriti of the Lord.] 


शमो दमस्तपः शोच क्षांतिराजवमेव च N 


ज्ञानं विज्ञानमास्तिक्यं IARA स्वभावजम्‌ ॥४२॥ 
XVIII. 42. 

gq: Control of mind दम: control of the senses 
तपः austerity शौचं purity ज्ञातिः forbearance आवे 
uprightness ज्ञानं knowledge विज्ञान realisation 
आस्तिक्यं belief in a hereafter एव also @ and स्वभाव जॉ 
born of the nature ब्रह्मकम (are) the duties of 
Bráhmanas. 

Control of mind and senses, austerity, 
purity, forbearance, and also uprightness, 
knowledge, realisation, belief in a hereafter,— 
these are the duties of Bráhmanas, born of 
(their own ) nature, 

WT तेजो ्वतिदाक्ष्यं युद्ध चाप्यपलायनम्‌ ॥ 
दीनमीश्वरभाचश्च gri RA स्वमावजम ॥३३॥ 
XVIIL 43. 

शोय Prowess तेज: boldness ufq: fortitude दाक्ष्य 
dexterity युद्धे in battle = and आपि also अपलायनं 
not flying दाने generosity इश्वरभाव: sovereignty च 
and स्वभावजे born of the nature ज्ञात्रं of Kshatriyas 
कर्म the duties 

Prowess, boldness, fortitude, dexterity, and 
also not flying from battle, generosity and 


aas SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 18. 
sovereignty are the duties of Kshatriyas, born 


ci their own ) nature. 


कृषिगोरक्षवाशिज्य SAU स्वभावजम्‌ |i 
परिचयोत्मकं कमे झूद्रस्यापि स्वभावजम ॥४४॥ 
XVII 44. 

गवेगोरक्षत्राणिञ्यं Agriculture, cattle-rearing and 
e us born of the nature चेश्यकर्म the duties 
?Yaishvas spges of a Sbudra अवि also परिचयात्मक 
ct the hae of service कर्म action स्वभावजं born of 
he nature. 

Acriculture, cattle-rearing and trade are 
the duties of Vaishyas, born of ( their own ) 
rature; action of the nature of service is 
atso the duty of the Shudra, born of (his own ) 
nature. 

"€ ^, x P~ of. P. oa 
स्वस्वकमरायाभरत: सासाद लभत AT: i 
स्वकमनिरतः सिद्धि यथा विदति assy ॥४५॥ 

XVUL 45. 

स्वे स्वे Each his own कर्माण to duty श्रामिरत्तः de- 
४८:८३ नरः man संसिद्धि the highest perfection लभते 
attains स्वकर्मनिरतः engaged in his own duty यथा how 
fate perfection विदाति attains तत्‌ that sr hear. "= 


(5 


ed 


क ub . 
Devoted each to his own duty, man attains 
the highest perfection. How engaged in his 
own duty, he attains perfection, that hear. 


; Oze2—according to his nature. 


The Apastamba Dharma-Shástra says: “Men 
of several castes and orders, each devoted to his 
respective duties, reap the fruits of their actions 
aiter death, and then by the residual Karma attain 
io 97४७७ in-superior countries, castes and families; 


43-47] EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER 329 


possessed of comparatively superior Dharma, 
span of lite, leaning, conduct, wealth, happiness. 
and intelligence. '] 


» (US bes Ce > 
यत. TINATA यन सवामद ततसम I 
कप यर CA ES ही , I 
रूवकमरा तमश्यच्य साहू विदात भानवः USE 
| XVII. 46. 

sq: From Whom ataf of all beings GATT: (isp 
the evolution येन by Whom इदं this gf all ततम्‌ is 
pervaded सानवः man स्वकमण with his own duty 
qu Him eð worshipping सिद्धि perfection 
बिरति attains. 

From Whom is the evolution of all. beings, 
by Whom all this is pervaded, worshipping 
Him with his own duty, a man attains per- 
fection. 

[The highest worship to the Lord consists, 
in the closest approach to Him. The veil of Maya 
comprising Karma or habits, tendencies and 
action prevents a man from nearing the Lord, i. ८... 
realising his own Self. By working out one’s 
Karma alone, according to the law of one's being, 
can this veil be rent and the end accomplished.] 


Wary eur विशुणः परधमोत्स्वयुष्ठितात ॥ 
स्वभावनियतं कमे कुवेन्नाप्तोति किल्बिषम्‌ ॥४७॥ 
XVIIL 47. 

Aaw: (Though) imperfect सधर्म: one’s own 
Dharma स्वनुष्ठितात्‌ well-performed षरधर्मांत्‌ than the 
Dharma of another म्याच better (is) स्वभावनियत 
ordained by his own nature कमे the duty कुवर doing 
किल्विषं evil न no आमोति (he) incurs. | 

Better is one's own Dharma, (though ) 
imperfect, than the Dharma of. another 


340 THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18, 


well-performed. He who does the duty 
ordained by his own nature incurs no evil. 
| AS a poisonous substance does not injure the 


worm born in that substanee, so he who does his 
Svadharma incurs no evil.] 


सहजे कमे कोन्तेय सदोषमपि न ART ॥ 
सवोरंभा हि दोषेण giar ARATAT: ॥४८॥ 
XVIII. 48. 

कौन्तेय O son of Kunti सदोष attended with evi] 
mq though सहजे with which he is born कमे the 
duty न not त्यज्ञेत one should relinquish fè for 
सर्वारंभा: all undertakings धूमेन by smoke afi: fire 
इव as दोषेण by evil आवृताः are enveloped. 

One should not relinquish, O son of Kunti, 
the duty to which he is born, though it is 
attended with evil, for all undertakings are 
enveloped by evil, as fire by smoke. 


| Duty efc.,——this need not mean caste duty. 


All undertakings: one's own as well as others’ 
duties, 


The greatest evil is bondage and this endures 
so long as one lives in the realm of the Gunas, 
except in the case of a freed soul. All action is 
comprised in one or the-other of the Gunas. All 
action therefore involves the evil of bondage,| 


e ~ e ec 
असक्तबुद्धिः सवत्र जितात्मा विगतस्पृहः i 
नेष्कस्यसिद्धिं परमां संन्यासेनाधिगच्छति ॥४६॥ 
XVII. 49. 
aaa Everywhere असक्तब्राद्धिः whose intellect is 
unattached जितात्मा who has subdued his heart 


विगतस्पृहः whose desires have fled संन्यासेन by renun- 
ciation परनां the supreme नेष्कम्येसिद्धि the perfection 


3 


47-51 | —IN RENUNCIATION 34L 


consisting in freedom from action भ्राधिगच्छाति (he) 
attains to 

He whose intellect is unattached every- 
where, who has subdued his heart, whose 
desires have fled, he attains to the supreme 
perfection, consisting of freedom from action 
by renunciation, 
mT Mob LES vases renunciation.—This may also be 
interpreted to mean :—he attains the supreme state in 
which he remains as the actionless Self, by his 


renunciation of all actions, for which he is prepared 
by his right knowledge. | 


सिद्धि प्रासो यथा ब्रह्म तथाप्रोति निबोध मे di 
समासेनेव कोन्तेय निष्ठा ज्ञानस्य या परा ॥२०॥ 
x XVII. 5o. 

कोन्तेय O son of Kunti fafe perfection तथा 
so tha! प्राप्तः reaching यथा how ag to Brahman 
gratia he attains समासेन in brief मे from Me fare 
learn ज्ञानस्य of knowledge या which प्रा supreme 
निष्ठा consummation: 

Learn from Me in brief, O son of Kunti, 
how reaching such perfection, he attains to 


Brahman, that supreme consummation of 
knowledge 3 


बुद्धा विद्युद्धया युक्तो ARTA नियम्य च ॥ 


शब्दादान्वषयास्त्यकत्वा रागद्वेषा व्युदस्य च २१ 
XVII. 51. 

Azgar Pure gwar with an intellect sp«m: 
endued yar with fortitude आत्मानं the body and 
the senses नियम्य subduing च्‌ and शब्दादीन्‌ sound 
and such other विषयाच्‌ sense-objects त्यक्वा 

25 ^ 


342 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [Chap. 18. 


Á— 
गाद 


relinquishing रागदवेषो attraction and hatred = and 
व्युद्स्य abandoning; 

Endued with a pure intellect; subduing 
the body and the senses with fortitude; 
relinquishing sound and such other sense- 
objects ; abandoning attraction and hatred ; 

[ Pure: free from doubt and misconception, 


being merged in Brahman through the elfinination, 
of all alien attributes ascribed to Him. 


Relinguishing sound Cc.,—abandoning all super- 
fluous luxuries, all objects except those only 
which are necessary for the bare maintenance of 
the body, and laying aside attraction. and hatred 
even for those objects. 


rf ~ me ध्वा es : 

वावक्तसवा लध्वाशा ATATRIARTAR: N 

€ ~ - s . X . C. i - 

यानयागपरा TAS वराग्य AAT (Ata: ॥५२॥ 
XVII. 52. 

विविक्तसेवी Resorting to a sequestered spot लघ्वाशी 
eating but little यतवा[क्कायमानसः body, speech and 
mind controlled नित्यं ever ध्यानयोगफर: engaged in 
meditation and concentration तम्य Gispassion 
agara: possessed with ; 

Kesorting to a sequestered spot; eating 
but little ; body, speech and mind controlled 3. 
ever engaged in meditation and comcentra- 
tion ; possessed with dispassion; a 

[Eating but little—as conducive to the serenity of 


thought by keeping off langour, sleepiness and the 
like. 


iWeditation—upon the nature of the Self, 


Cocentration—one-pointedness of thought, on 
one feature of the Self. 


Dispassion—for the seen and the unseen.] 


31-54 | EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER 343 

ð e * a + ® e 
अहेकारं बलं दप कामं कोधे परिग्रहम N 

£2. eS e n» ~ 
विमुच्य निममः शांतो ब्रह्मभूयाय RETA ॥५३॥ 

XVIIL 53. 

अहंकारं Egoism बले power दर्पं pride काम lust 
क्रोध wrath qif property विसुच्य forsaking निर्ममः 
freed from the notion of “mine” शस: tranquil 
,ब्रह्ममूयाय for becoming Brahman कलपते (he) is fit. 

Forsaking egoism, power, pride, lust, wrath, 
property; freed from the notion of “mine,” 
and tranquil, he is fit for becoming Brah- 
man. 


[ Power—that power which is combined with 
passion and desire. 

Property: Though a man who is free from all 
"passions of the mind and the senses, may own 
so much of external belongings as is necessary for 
bodily sustenance and for the observance of his 
feligious duties ( Dharma ), yet this the aspirant 
abandons, even if this comes of itself, because 
he does not regard the bodily life as his; thus he 
becomes a Paramahamsa Paribrájaka, a Sannyasin 
of the highest order.) 


ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा न शोचति न कांक्तति ॥ 


समः सरेषु भूतेषु मद्गाक्त लभते पराम्‌ ॥५४॥ 
` XVIIL 54. 
ब्रह्मभूतः Brahman-become प्रसन्नात्मा tranquil-minded 
न neither शोचति (he) grieves न nor कांक्षति desires 
x4 to all भूतेषु (to) beings समः the same परां supreme 
मद्धाक्ते devotion unto Me ar, (he) attains to. 


Brahman-become, tranquil-minded, he neither 
grieves nor desires; the same to all beings; 
he attains to supreme devotion unto Me, 


^J} THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18, 


Brahman-become: not that he is yet freed and 
Fecome the Absolute, but is firmly grounded in 
the knowledge that he is Brahman. His attain- 
ment of freedom is described in the next verse 


upreme devotion : the devotion stated in VII—17. ] 


भक्त्या मामभिजानाति यावान्यश्रास्मि तत्त्वत: ॥ 


ततो मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा विशते तदनंतरम ॥५५॥ 
XVIII. 55. 

यावाद What यः who ẹ and gar lam मां Me 
अकन्या by devotion तत्त्वतः in reality अभिजानाति (he) 
knows ततः then qt Me तत्त्वतः in reality grar having 
known तदनंतरं forthwith arg into Me विशते ( he ) 
enters 

By devotion he knows Me in reality, what 
and who I am; then having known Mein, 
reality, he forthwith enters into Me. 


सर्वकर्माण्यपि सदा FATT मद्यपाश्रयः॥ 


मत्प्रसादादवाप्रोति शाश्वतं पदमव्ययम्‌ ॥५६॥ 
XVIII. 56 

सदा Always सवंकमाणे all actions mar: doing 
आप even मदव्यपाश्रयः taking refuge in Me मत्पसादात 
by My grace शश the eternal अव्यय immutable 
षद State अवाधभोति (he) attains to 

Even doing all actions always,- taking 
refuge in Me,—by My grace he attains to the 
Eternal Immutable State. 


चेतसा सर्वेकमोरि मयि संन्यस्य मत्परः ॥ 


चुद्धियोगमुपाश्रित्य मैञ्चित्तः सततं भव ॥५७॥ 
XVIII. 57 
aaar mentally सर्वकर्माणि all deeds म्ये in Me 
सन्यस्य resigning मत्परः having Me as the highest 


24-50] —IN RENUNCIATION 315 


goal fgat Buddhi Yoga qrar resorting to 
tad ever मचित्तः with the mind fixed on 
Me भवे be. 

Resigning mentally ‘all deeds in Me, having 
Me as the highest goal, resorting to Buddhi 
Yoga do thou ever fix thy mind on Me. 

* 
MMT: सवेदुगोणि मत्पसादात्तरिष्यसि N 
अथ चेत्वमहंकाराजह्न श्रोष्यसि चिनंकष्यास ॥१८॥ 
XVIIL 58. 

eq Thou arà: fixing thy mind on Me मत्मसादात 
by My grace सर्वदुर्गाणि all obstacles तरिष्यसि ( thou ) 
shalt overcome अथ but Ga if अहंकारात from self- 
conceit q not ऑओष्यसि (thou) wilt hear विनंक्ष्यसि 

^(thou) shalt perish. 

Fixing thy mind on Me, thou shalt by My 
grace, overcome all obstacles; but if from 


self-conceit thou wilt not hear Me, thou shalt 
perish. 


यदहंकारमाश्रित्य न योत्स्य इति मन्यसे N 
मिथ्यैष व्यवसायस्ते प्रकृतिस्त्वां नियोक्ष्यति ॥५६॥ 
XVII. 59. 

सहकार Self-conceit ञ्राश्रि्य abiding in न not 
योत्स्ये (1) will fight यत्‌ if इति thus मन्यसे (thou) thinkest 
ते thy एष this व्यवसायः resolve मिथ्या (is) vain 
प्रकृति: (thy) Prakriti त्वां. thee नियोक्ष्यति will 
constrain. 

If, filled with self-conceit, thou thinkest, 
“I will not fight,” vain is this thy resolve, 
thy Prakriti will constrain thee. 

(Thy Prakriti: Thy natures a Kshatriya.] 


Sis  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [Chap. 18. 


स्वभावजेन कॉन्तेय निवद्धः स्वेन कर्मणा ॥ 
कतु नेच्छसि यन्मोहात्करिष्यस्यचशोऽपि तत्‌ loll 
XVI. 60, 

zem O son of Kunti मोहात from delusion यत्‌ 
what cd to do न not इच्छसि thou desirest स्वभावज्ञन 
Lern of thy) own nature स्वेत by (thy) own कर्मणा 
(^v Karma निब्रद्धः fettered अञ्जः helpless, in spite 
ci lhvseif तत्‌ that आपि even करिष्यासि (thou) shalt 
Dare to; do. 

Fettered, O son of Kunti, by thy own 
Karma, born of thy own nature, what thou, 
irom delusion, desirest not to do, thou shalt 
have to do in spite of thyself. | 


t © * boo e ex e 

इश्वरः सर्वेभूतानां हृदे शेऽज्जुन तिष्ठति ॥ 
© [मयन्सवेभूतारनि e. 
STHV यंत्रारूढान मायया ॥६१॥ 
XVII. 67: 

अजून O Arjuna इश्वरः the Lord मायया by Maya 
यन्त्रारूटान mounted on a machine सवभूतानि all 
rings श्रामयन causing to revolve सवभूताना of all 
tengs & in the hearts तिष्टति dwells, 
The Lord, O Arjuna, dwells in the hearts 
ail beings, causing all beings by His 
va, to revolve, (as if) mounted on a 
nachine 


C 
^ 


po 
+ 
a 
T 
A 


Sce commentary to IX, ro. 
-i tung Means ‘white, and here it signifies—' O 
] ure-hearted one i 


तमच शरश गच्छ सर्वेभावेन भारत N 
तत्मसादात्परां शांति स्थानं प्राप्स्यसि शाश्वतं | £xli 


60-64] EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER O47 


NTIS x 
> भारत 0 Bharata सर्वेभावेन with all thy heart तम्‌ in 
Him एव even शरणं गच्छ take refuge तत्प्रसादात by His 
grace qat supreme शते peace शाश्वतं eternal स्यानं 
the abode प्राप्स्यांस shalt (thou) attain. 
Take refuge in Him with all thy heart, 
O Bharata; by His grace shalt thou attain 
supreme peace ( and ) the eternal abode, 


इति ते ज्ञानमाख्यातं गुह्याद्गुह्यतरं मया ॥ 
विद्धश्येतदशेषेण यथेच्छासि तथा कुरु ॥६३॥ 
XVIII. 63. 

इति Thus gga than all profundities ग़ह्यतरं more 
profound ज्ञाने wisdom ते to thee मया by Me आख्यात 
^as been declared spar fully एतत it fara 
reflecting over यथा as इच्छासि thou likest qum so 
कुरु act. 

Thus has wisdofh more profound than all 
profundities, been declared to thee by Me; 
reflecting over 1t fully, act as thou likest. 


[ // : the Shastra, the teaching as declared above. | 


सवगुदह्यतमं भूयः शशु मे परमं वच: ॥ 


ELITR, म हडामात तता ALANA A TEAR ॥६४॥ 
^ XVII 04. 

मे My सर्वशुह्यतमं the profoundest of all परमं 
supreme बच: word भूयः again Wy hear thou में of 
Me z£ dearly gg: beloved असि thou art ततः there- 
fore ते to thee हितं what is good वक्ष्यामि will L 
speak. 

Hear thou again My supreme word, the 
profoundest of all; because thou art dearly 


F B E E T N C a S 
^i8 THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [ Chap. 18, 
beloved of Me, therefore will I speak what is 
E226 to thee, 

vaiz : though more than once declared. 


3Á 
-— 


TH c r 7 
मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरू ॥ 
मामेवेप्यसि सत्यं ते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि X negn 


XVIL 65. a 
zaar With mind occupied with Me qus 
Gevcied to Me मद्यारी sacrificing to Me wa be thou 


माँ to Me नसस्कुरू bow down मामिव Myself एष्यसि 
atu shalt reach अहे I ते untothee स॒त्यं truly कतिजाने 


4. promise मे to Me प्रियः dear असति thou art. 


Occupy thy mind with Me, be devoted to 
Sie, sacrifice to Me, bow down to Me, Thou 
s;a.t reach Myself; truly do 1 promise untor 
thee, { for ) thou art dear to Me, 

Tow skalf reach Myself: Thus aet Ing,—i. e., 
iscing upon the Lord alonc as thy aim, means 
an. end—thon shak attain the Highest. 

Lren deo I premise unto thee.—Bave im pheit 
ior in the declarations of Me, the Lord, as I pledge 
क्क. 

^ HT घमान्पा P~ रत्यज्य w e * TEST 
ETIA FALAT ATAR UCU बज ॥ 

: त्वा A enis > EAA e » 
अह त्वा सकपापभ््यो माचायथ्याम सा ga: ER 

XVIH. 66. P 
सदधमान All Dharmas Wass relinquishing tag 
aone माम्‌ in Me grat refuge ar take sz 1 त्वा 
ince सर्वषापेभ्यः from all sins semen will 
li»crate at ido) not Way grieve. 

Relinguishing all Dharmas, take refuge in 
Me alone; I will liberate thee from all Sins; 
critve not, 


F 


64-67 | —IN RENUNCIATION 8-9 


[AU Dharmas—including Adharma also: all 
. actions, righteous or unrighteous, since absolute 
freedom from the bondage of all action is intended 

to be taught here. 

Take refuge in Me alome—knowing that there is 
naught else except Me, the Self of all, dwelling 
the same in all. 

Liberate thee—by manifesting Myself as thy 

n own Self. 

Ali sins: all bonds of Dharma and Adharma. 

Sankara in his commentary here very strongly 
combats the opinion of those who hold that highest 
spiritual realisation ( Jnana) and work (arma) 
may go together in the same person. No work, save 
such as is done absolutely without attachment, self- 
interest or passion, solely for the benefit of man- 
kind, can be performed by him who has realised 
the true nature of the Soul, viz., Its freedom from 
all worldly conditions and limitations, and Its self- 
dependent light and bliss. So the conclusion is, 
that neither the conjunction of Jnana with Karma, 
nor Karma alone conduces to the absolute 
cessation of Samsára, but it is only the Right Knowl- 
edge of the Self which does so.| 


इदं ते नातपस्काय नाभक्ताय कदाचन N 
न चाशुश्रूषवे वाच्ये न च मां योऽभ्यसूयति neo 
XVIIL., 67. 

HATERA To one who is devoid of austerities 
ते by thee इदं this न कटाचन never वाच्यं to be 
spoken न nor ग्रभक्ताय to one without devotion नच 
nor TOIT to one who does not render service 
य: who माम्‌ at Me manata cavils न च nor. 

This is never to be spoken by thee to one 
who is devoid of austerities, nor to one who 
does not render service, nor to one who 
cavils at Me, x ` 


“7 lis—Shastra which has been taught to you. 


ME SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [ Chap. 18, 


१. ८८0 the Guru; अऋझुश्भषत्वै also means,—to 


chet na does not wish to hear. 

य इदं परमं gel महूकतेष्टसिधास्यति ॥ 

भक्ति मयि परां कृत्वा मामेवेष्यत्यसंशयः ॥६८॥ 
XVI. 68 


य: Who परमं deeply wey profound philosophy 


ES ius agarq to My devotees अभिषास्यति will 


-ciga to Me परां supreme भक्ति devotion कृत्वा 


c voc असंशयः doubtless माँ एव to Me एष्यति shall 


he who with supreme devotion to Me will 
teach: this deeply profound philosophy to My 


- 


oveotees shal doubtless come to Me 


f^ 


E f—in the faith that he is thus doirse service 


to i. the Supreme Teachei 


4’ feel or, feed from doubts.] 


न च तदस्मान्मचुष्येषु कशिन्से प्रियक्ृरत्तमः N 

सविता न च मे तस्मादन्यः ग्रियतरो भुवि ॥६६॥ 
XVIIL. f. 

i Among men quis than he काश्चित्‌ any 

o Me तियक्रत्तमः one who does dearer service 


vil 10: सस्सात than? he अन्य: another मे to Ae 
149737: dearer चा and भवि On eauh न no सविता 


"3 UM r 
क && E विनी 


Nur among men is there any whe does 
Cearer service to Me nor shall there be 
8: ner on earth dearer to Me, than he 

रश: who bands down the Shastra to a fit person. | 

aes mi 

STAA च य इम चस्य सवादभावया: |! 


ज्ञानयज्वेन तनाहमिए: स्यामिति मे मतिः ॥७०॥ 


g 


67-71 | EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER 351 


XVIII. 7o. 

यः Who = and आवयोः of ours gẹ this धर्म्य sacred 
ware dialogue अष्यष्यते shall study W« by him 
अहं 1 ज्ञानखज्ञेन by the Vajna of Knowledge ṣẹ: 
worshipped स्याम्‌ (1) shall have been gfq such मे My 
मालि: conviction. 

Anda he whe shall study this sacred 
‘dialogue of ours, by him shall f have been 
worshipped by the Yajna of knowledge; such 
13 my conviction. 

[ Fajna of kuowledge: A Yajna can be performed 
in four ways, such as (1) Vidhi or ritual, (2) Japa, (3) 
Upamsu, or a prayer uttered in a low voice, or (4) 
manasa, or a prayer offered with the mind. Fzdna- 


yajua or the Yajna of knowledge comes under the 
^head of mdnasa, and 1s therefore the highest. 


The study of the Gita will produce an effect 
equal to that of the Yajna of knowledge. | 


श्रद्वावाननसूयश्च शणशुयादपि यो AT: N 
सोऽपि मुक्त: शुभांछोकान्प्राप्रयात्पुरयकमरणां ७१ 
2 
AC VILIS. EE 

sgar Full of Shraddha अनसूयः free from 
malice च and अः who नरः man yaaa shall hear 
xd even सः he अपि too सुक्तः liberated पुशयक्रमंणां 
of those of righteous deeds शुभान्‌ happy लोकान 
to the worlds TARA shall attain. 

And even that man who hears this, full of 
Shraddha and free from malice, he too, 
liberated, shall attain to the happy worlds of 
those of righteous deeds. 


[Even that man: much more so he who under- 
stands the doctrine. | , 


5253 THE WAY OF LIBERATION— [Chap. 18, 


* g B + a 


कर्चदेतच्छते पार्थ त्वयेकाग्रेण चेतसा ॥ 


कःचइज्ञानसंमोहः प्रनष्टस्ते धनंजय ॥७२॥ 
XVIL 72. 

दाय O Pártha त्वया by thee एकीग्रेण with attentive 
Speer with: mind एतत this arag whether शत has 
zen heard धनंजय O Dhananjaya q thy अज्ञानसमाह: 

clusion of ignorance afata whether gas: has” 
Zgan destroyed. 

Has this been heard by thee, O Partha 
wito an attentive mind? Has the delusion of 
t:v ignorance been destroyed,O Dhananjaya? 

BSA उवाच ॥ 
TI मोहः स्म्ठ॒तिलेब्धा त्वत्पसादान्मयाच्युत ॥ 
सितोस्मि गतसंदेहः करिष्ये वचनं तव ॥७३॥ 
XVIIL 73. 

awa: Arjuna उवाच said: > 

ऋच्युन O Achyuta मोहः the delusion qv: is deg- 
“५ सया by me त्वतप्रसादात through Thy grace 
स्यात: memory Msgr has been gained स्थितः firm 
stay 1 am गतसंदेहः (my) doubts are gone qq Thy 
4a vord करिष्ये | will do. 


; १ 
v ba] + 
bx 


e 


A 


Arjuna said: | s 

Destroyed is my delusion, and “I have 
gained my memory through Thy ‘grace, O 
Achruta. I am firm; my doubts are gone, 
I wil do Thy word, 

.- Vr mory—of the true nature of the Self. 

£irv—in Thy command. 


7 1 ne purpose of the knowledge of Shástras is 
~ Gestruction of doubts and delusions, and the 
F--2gnition of the true nature of the self. Here, 


72-75] —IN RENUNCIATION 353 


the answer Of Arjuna conclusively shows, that that 
purpose has been fulfilled in him 

The teaching of the Shastra is over here. The 
rest is only 10 connect it with the main narrative.] 


संजय उवाच ॥ 
इत्यहं वासुदेवस्य पार्थस्य च महात्मनः॥ 
संवादसिममश्रौषमङ्भतं रोमहषण म्‌ ॥७३॥ 
° XVIII. 74. 
संजयः Sanjaya उवच said: 
गहं I इति thus वाञ्ुदेवस्य of Vasudeva महात्मनः of 
high-souled पार्थस्य (of) Partha च and इमं this 
रोमहर्ईण which causes the hair to stand on end 
aga wonderful संवाद dialogue spuüpq (I) have 
heard. 
> sanjaya said: 
Thus have I heard this wonderful dialogue 
between Vasudeva and the  high-souled 
Partha, causing my hair to stand on end, 


व्यासप्रसादाच्छुतवानेतद्गुह्ममह परम ॥ 


योगं योगेश्च रात्कृष्णात्साचात्कययतः स्वयम ७५ 
XVII. 75. 

अह I व्यासप्रसादात through the grace of Vyása 
इमं this परं supreme गुह्य most profound सोमं Yoga 
कथयतः speaking स्वयं Himself योगेश्वरात from the 
Lord of Yoga कृष्णात from Krishna xrqapa I have 
heard. 

Through the grace of Vyasa have I heard 
this supreme and most profound Yoga, direct 
from Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, Himself 
declaring it. 

[Through...... Vydsa: by obtaining from him the 
adivya-chakshu or divine vision-| 


3254 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [Chap.:& 


राजन्सेस्खृत्य QA संवादमिममञ्गतम्‌॥ 


MUA HAG: पुणय हृष्यामि चः मुइमेहः ॥७६॥ 
XVIII. 76. 

राजन O King केशवाजुनथो: between Keshava and 
Ariuna gł this yaa holy agi wonderful संवाद 
dialogue geseg संस्मृत्य as l remember and remember 
qz: gg: again and again हृष्यामि I rejoice. ' 

O King, as I remember and remember 
this wonderful and holy dialogue between 
Keshava and Arjuna, F rejoice again and 
asain ‘ 

King: Dhritarashtra.] 
तञ्च ALAA AIA रूपमत्यद्ध्त हरे: ॥ 
विस्मयो मे महान्‌ राजन्‌ हृष्यामि च पुनः पुनः ७७ 

XVIL. 77. 

राजन O King gx: of Hari तत्‌ that BET wonder- 
ful ey Form संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य as I remember and re- 
member and में my महान great विस्मयः wonder 
च anc अह 1 पुनः पुनः again and again हृष्यामि (1) 
IU OCE 

Aud as I remember and remember the 
mest wonderful Form of Hari, great is my 
wouder, O King; and I rejoice again ‘and 
again. A 

Ferm: Vis% zarupa, the Universal Form | 


यत्र यागश्वर: कृष्णा यत्र पाया AJAT 


तत्र श्रावजयां WAIST नातमांतमम ISSI 
XVIIL 78 
यत्र Wherever योगेश्वरः the Lord of Yoga कृष्ण: 
Krisina यत्र wherever qiu the wielder of the bow 


76-78 | EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER 353 


पार्थः Partha सच there स्री: prosperity ma: victory 
भूतिः expansion sar sound नीतिः polity इति such में 
my माते; conviction 


Wherever is Krishna, the Lord of Yoga, 
wherever is Pártha, the wielder of the bow, 
there are prosperity, victory, expansion, and 
sound polity : sueh is my conviction. 

7 [ The bow—called the Gandiva.} 


इात श्रामक्गवद्वातासूपानपत्ख बह्मावद्याया याग” 
शास्त्र श्राकष्णाजुनसवाद सन्यासयागा- 
नामाष्टादराऽध्यायः ॥ 
Thus in the Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita, the 
^ Essence of the Upanishads, the Science 
of the Brahman, the Scripture of 
Yoga, the Dialogue between Sri 
Krishna and Arjuna, ends the 
Eighteenth Chapter 
designated : 
THE WAY OF LIBERATION IN 
" RENUNCIATION. 


D m 


Here the Bhagavad-Gita ends. 
d^ शांतिः शांतिः शांतिः ॥ 
Peace! Peace! Peace be toall! 


PSS od 


॥ पर्थ NATAT RITR ॥ 
THE GREATNESS OF THE GITA 
SAMUT बमः ॥ ्रोराचारघणाय नमः ॥ 


Salutation to Sri Ganesha! 
: Sdlutation to Sri Radhdramana! 


| Ganesha is the God of wisdom and remover of 
obstacles; hence He is invoked and worshipped 
at the commencement of every important under- 
taking. Addkéramana—the Lover of Rádhà,—Sri 
Krishna. ] 

qirara ॥ 

भगवन्परमेशान भक्तिरयभिचारिशी॥ 
रव्य सुज्यसानस्य कथे भवति है TATA 

Dhara (the Earth) said: 


.(1). O Blessed Lord, O Supreme Ruler, 
how may one, whois held back by his Prd- 
rabdha Karunia, obtain unswerving devotion रे 

|Práraédha Karma—Karma has been divided 
into three principal kinds, having regard to the 
time in which its fruit is to be reaped: Agami, 
Sanchita, and Prdrabdha, Agdmi is that whose 
fruit will be reaped in the next incarnation, 
Sanchita consists of those seeds, as it were, which ` 
will bear gruit in the remote future. Prdrabdha is 
that Karma which we have already begun to reap. 
This is the only Karma from which there is no 
escape. The first two can be destroyed by perfect 
knowledge. They then become “ like fried seeds.” 
But Práraódha Karma must be reaped to the end. | 


विष्णुरुवाच ॥ 
प्रारब्ध भुज्यमानो हि गीताभ्यासरतः सदा ॥ 
स्त सुक्तः स सुखी लोके कमण] नोपलिप्यते ॥२॥ 
20 


ers SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [2-7 


Lord Vishnu said 

Tf one be devoted to the constant 
m of the Gita, even though he be 
: -trained by Prarabdha Karma, vet is he 
row Makta, now hapyy, in this very world. 
Ee is not tainted by (new ) Karma 


महापापादिपार्पांने गीताध्यान करोति चेत्‌ ॥ 
कःचत्स्पश न HAA नालनीदलमंबुबत ui : 


3. No evil, however great, can affect him 
wow meditate on the Gita. He is like the 
ictus-leaf untouched by the water. 
गीलायाः पुस्तकं यत्र यत्र पाठ: रवतते N 

च सर्वाशि तीथोनि प्रयागादोनि es चे yen 
स्वे देवात SHUT योगिनः पन्नगाश्च ये ॥ 

- - £f ही ~ A 
गापाल गोपिका वापि नारदोद्धवपाषदे: Vil 

+% s. Where there is the book of the 
aita, where its study is proceeded with, there 
are present all tbe holy places, there verily, 
are Prayága and the rest. There also are all 
tis Devas, Rishis, Yogins, and Pannagas, so 
alse the Gopálas and Gopikás, with Narada 
| १७ and their whole train of comrades 
Salat जायत शाघ यत्र गीता aadA ॥ 
यत्र VAT ATCT पठन पाउन Ady ॥ 
त्राह araga yria नवसास सदव हि॥६९॥ 


Where the Gita is read, forthwith comes 
help. Where the Gita is discussed. recited 


tanght, or heard, there, O Earth, beyoud 
a tGoubt, do I My seif unfailingly reside 


TAE तिष्ठाम गीता मे चोत्तमं TERI 
प्रताज्ञानसपा Ser नान्खाकान्पालयाम्यहम WON 





^ 


7-13] TIE GREATNESS OF THEGITA 359 


(7) In the refuge of the Gita I abide; the 
Gita is My chief abode. Standing on the wis- 
dom of the Gita, I maintain the three worlds. 


e - ens ^ ५ 
गाता म परमा [वद्या STRIS न सशयः ॥ 
Les NER UNE k 
ग्र'पेमाचाचरा नित्या स्वानिवाच्यपदात्मिका ॥८॥ 
+ =, =, 7. v 

चिदानंदेन कृष्णन प्रोक्ता सखमुखतो$ज्ञुनम ॥ 
क. + ^ ^ 
वेदत्रयी परानंदा तत्त्वाथक्षानसंयुता NEN 

(8 & 9). The Gita is Supreme Knowledge 
of Me, hence it is undoubtedly inseparable 
from Brahman,—this Knowledge absolute, 
imperishable, eternal, supremely blissful, of 
the essence of My inexpressible State—the 
Knowledge comprising the whole of the three 
Vedas, and consisting of the realisation of 
the true nature of the Self, declared by the 
Wil-knowing and Blessed Krishna, out of His 
own mouth, to Arjuna, 

[A rd amdtré—lit., the half-syllable, and refers 


LÀ 


to the dot on the 3 ssynibolistivcally, it stands [or 
the Z'eriva state, hence, the Absolute. | 


यो$एादराजपो नित्यं नरो निश्चलमानसः ॥ 
शानसिद्धि स लभते तता याति परं पदम्‌ ॥१०॥ 


(10). That man who with steady mind 
recites the eighteen chapters daily, attains 
the perfection of knowledge and thus reaches 
the highest plane. 


पाठे समर््रऽसंपूर्ण ततोऽभ पाठमाचरेत्‌ | 


तदा गोदानजं पुण्ये लभते नात संशयः ॥११॥ 

(11) If unable to recite the whole, then 
half of it may be read; and he who does this 
acquires merit, equal to that of the gift of a 
cow. There is no doubt of this. 


निभाग पठमानस्तु गेगास्नानफलं लभेत ॥ 


3N SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [12-17 


bm * he 
qed जपमानस्तु सोमयागफल WHT ॥१२॥ 
ro, By the recitation of a third part, he 
riv Lain the same merit as by bathing in the 
Ganes. By the repetition of asixth part, he 
mav obtain the fruit of the Soma-sacrifice 


एकाध्यायं तु या नित्य पठत भाक्तसयुत:॥ 
रुठ्लकमवाप्नोति गणो भूत्वा वसेञ्चिर्स॥१३॥ _ 
He who reads, full of devotion, even 
z chapter daily, attains to the Rudraloka, 
acd lives there for along time, having become 
2 of those who wait on Shiva. | 
“Become €e.—lit., attained to Ganahood.] 
अध्याय RTRATS वा नित्यं यः पठते AT: ॥ 
a याति नरतां यावन्मन्वंतरं THAT ॥१४॥ 

‘If. The man who daily reads a quarter” 
cf a chapter, or of a Sloka, O Earth, attains 
tc Manhood so long as the cycle lasts 

leuius f9 Jlanhood: is born every time ina 
man-body 
गताया: सलाकररक सस पच IgE I 
छा जानक तदच वा VSTRTAT य: Was ॥१९॥ 
चट्रलाकमवाधात वपाणामयुत Aa di 
गातापाट्समायुक्ता जता ATT IAT AAT ॥१६॥ 


15 & 16;. The man who recites ten, seven 
Eve, tour, three or two Slokas, or even one or 
hair cf a Sioka of the Gita certainly" lives in 
Lrandraioxa for ten thousand years. Intent 
un the reading of the Gita, he who leaves the 
body, obtains the world of Man, after deat] 


गातान्यास पुन: WT लभते साक्तमुत्तमाम ॥ 
गातत्युचारसयुक्ता [घ्रयमाणा गति लभत्‌ ॥१७॥ 
(I7. ‘Again practising the Gita, he attains 


4 


17-22] THE GREATNESS OF THEGITA 361 


Supreme Mukti. The dying man uttering the 
word “Gita” will find the way ( to salvation). 


रीताथश्रवणासक्तो महापापयुतोऽपि वा ॥ 
वेकुथठं AHA Ta विष्शुना सह मोदते ॥१८॥ 

(18). One who loves to hear the meaning 
of the Gita, even though he have been full 
of evil deeds, attains to heaven, and lives in 
"beatitude with Vishnu. 


गीताथ ध्यायते नित्यं कृत्वा कमोणि भूरिशः N 
जीवन्मुक्तः स विज्ञयो देहांते परमं पदम NEN 
(19). He-who constantly meditates on the 
meaning of the Gita, even though he perform 
Karma incessantly,—he isto be regarded as a 
fivanmukta, and after the destruction of his 
body he attains to the highest plane of 
*knowled ge. ] 


e £7 - क. 
गोतामाश्रत्य बहवा भूभुजा जनकादय: ॥ 
निूतकल्मषा लोके गीता याता: परं पदम ॥२०॥ 
(20). By the help of this Gita, many kings 
like Janaka became free from their im- 
purities and attained to the highest goal. It 
is SO sung. 


गीतायाः पठनं कृत्वा माहात्म्यं नेव यः पठेत्‌ ॥ 
Tl पाठो भवेत्तस्य श्रम एव ह्युदाहृतः ॥२१॥ 


(21). "He who having finished the reading 
of the Gita, does not read its Máhátmyam as 
declared here, his readiug is in vain, it is all 
labour wasted. 


एतन्माहात्म्यसंयुक्तं गीताभ्यासं करोति यः॥ 
स्व तत्फलमवाझोति दुलभां गतिमाप्नुयात्‌ ॥२२॥ 


(22). He who studies the Gita, accompanied 
with this discourse on its, Mahatmyam, he 


ona SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [22-23 


dd उवाच i 
माहात्म्यमेतद्वीताया WAT प्रोक्तं सनातनम N 
गातांते च पठेचस्तु ASEH तत्फलं WAT ॥२३॥ 
| Sita said: He whoshallread this eternal 
a ess of the Gita, declared by me, after 
x wing Snished the reading of the Gita itself, 
^btain the fruit described herein. 


These declarations will, no doubt, seem to be 
Linhts of extravagant fancy, if they are 
eir literal sense. They may be explained 
iT T as mere -lrihardia or a statement 
E rification meant to stimulate a strong desire 
udv of the Gita, which being performed 
: o day, may, by the force of the truth 
Li grandeur of one or other of its teachings 
ze an inner chord of the heart sometime, so 
much 83 as to change the whole nature of the 
ror good; (2) or, the “reading” and ‘‘re- 
“ and so forth, of the whole or a part 
‘mot perhaps be taken in their ordinary sense 
meaning lip-utterance and the like, but in view 
6^ ing grat results indicated, they may be reason- 
.9 construed to mean the assimilation of the 
mee of the Gita teachings into the practical 
Lv lite of the individual. What wonder, then, 
i such a one, who is the embodiment of the 
"oud be a true Jnanin, or a Fitanmakte 
inai he would, in proportion to histsuccess of 
~ SO. attain the intermediate spheres of evolu- 
on and finally obtain Mukti.) 


इत श्वोवाराहपुराणे श्रीगीतामाहात्म्य संपूशाम ॥ 
Thus ends in the Váráha Purana the discourse 
designated: THE GREATNESSOF THE GITA, 
i : नः 


~ 
iJ 

Au # 

am 


D 
4 


E 
4 
a7 
HE 
4 
[n # € 
ber 


fu 


aem a 
la 
5 ड * 








INDEX 


Ay 
SISRWIC— iv. 13; xiii. 29. 
ऋकम--४. 16, 13. -paii 5. 
ARIF Vi 27. 
EATS aT —xvili 16. 
TEPRV. 11. 
अ क्कत््ञादिदः i. 29. 
gag vi. La 
SIT—V. 21. अतक्त॒य:--5. 33. 
अ il By DLS x.235 xXl.19, 39; SIL 1$, 5 
SPAT: —vili. 21; xv. 10. अक्षरात sv. 18. 
ear: —iv. 37; vill. 24, (see Com.” 25) ; ix. 16 ; xi. 39; 
xviii. 48. 
yagi. 13. SISTg:—iii. 10. 
i-re —xvl. 2. i 
urSremneq-——viil 9. martri. 3. अचिन्त्यः. 25. 
waga -i 21; Xl. 42 ; xvii. 73. 
sii 21; vii 25; X. 3, I2. ऋञ्जः. 20; iv. 6. 
ST eq: —vil. 245 1X. I1; Xlll. 25. ग्रज्ञ शा". 40. 
srpara—v. r6 ; xiii. 11; xiv. 10, 17 ; xvi. 4. 
UAT viii. ५. आशोः vil]. 9. 
SER: li 12; Ie Oe E शा II XV 0. 
आनिस्दमशीज्ञलस्य--४. 16. 
. SERERE — Vl. 21. 
ऋआत्यक्षंत:--४. 16. sregemr.— xvii. 9. 
अआदेशकाले--६४॥. 22. 
धर्मण. 31, 32. अधर्मः 40. 
sry:—xiv. 18; xv. 1,2. अवःशारखं- ४". 1. 


% Com.—Abbreviation for Comment. 


* 


272  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA — [sr — sms 


शराधटेवतं-- पा. g. ्रधिदेव— ४. 1. 

ऋस ४, I. 4. 
gaga: vill. 2, 4. 

aya? nS मिह Tae 

Seay Ix. :C. र 
SATA Alara ea Xi. 11. भ्रच्यात्मानत्याा--वर. 3. 
SAR — X. 32. अध्यात्मसंजितु--५. 1. 
आऱ्यात्मसा- ५. 20: vli. I. 3 r 
seag: — A dhyâsa i — See Cer. xiij 
EIU — 1. 3: xiv. 6: xv. 20. 
KAA — XL 3T. अनन्तम्‌ 
eenNeu-—xi 38. -q—xi. 16. à 
झअलज्लदिजयु--1. 15. 
XrewQqpHi8—si. 42. -q—xi. 19. 
3ra*q1:—1i. 41. 
WAST TAT: Tih. 34. आनन्यभाक्‌-5. २० ^ 
अनन्यमनसः. 15. 
अनन्यया (भ्या). 22; xi. 54. 
अनन्ययोगेन — xii. 10. अनन्याः. 22 i 
gaga: 0331 25. ग्रनपश्य--6५ ऽ 
ऋन्मिथ्वेगः- iii. y. wah 5 
अननः. 4. ग्रनलेन--111. 39. 
XO ~i. r^. 
अनस्य. 1. gaam — xviii. sp. 
अनहकारः--5४17. ०. xwEXTEI xvii. 26 r 
अनात्मलः--४४. 6. = 
अनादित्वात--४ ४. 5. अनादिमत--झाते. rz. 
अनादिमध्यांतस्‌--४.- 19. अनादी xiii. 19. 
अनामयः. 51; xiv. 6. 
अनायजुएं--!. 2. r 
sarna riii. 23. 26 
eT — xi rg. 
अनित्य. 33. Si. r4. 





Xx. 20. 


f 


अनी-अफला | INDEX 365 


sapqr—xvi. 8. 

HIRI — X. II. 

JIWA Vİ. 24. yanat — vii. 18. 
प्रनुद्रिममनाः-- 11. 56. अनुद्ेगकरे 3५. 15. 
'पनुषकारिशे- XV. 20. 3 

gager —xviil. 25. wg Wq-—xviii. 39. 
अनुमन्ता ४11. 22. 

ऋआनुशासितौरं viii. 9. 

अनुस्मर. 7. -A—vill. 13. आलुस्मरत्‌ “णं. 9. 
प्रनकचित्तविश्रान्ताः- अशा. 16. 
अनेकजनन्‍्मसंसिद्ध:--४. 45. 

प्रन्तक्राले--!1. 92 ; viii. 5. अन्तगतं-- ४1. 28. 
अन्तरात्मना--“९॥.. 47. अरन्तरारामः--५- 24. 
अन्त ज्योंति:--५. 24. 

अन्त —ii. 10 ; x. 19, 20, 32, 40; xiii. 15: XV. 3; xvii. 6, 
spe. 24. 

feqq xii. 15. अन्ते. rg; viii. 6. 
WHA —XV. 14. अन्नात. 14 

अन्यत. 31, 42 ; vil. 2, 7 ; xi. 7 ; xvi. 8. 
अन्यदवता:---५. 20; ix. 23. 

grep xi. 25. 

अपशस्परसंभूते--5५. 8. 

Spp —vil. S. 

Sr3fTE:-—vÓ. 10. है 
gafst &c. — Com. ii. 27. 

अपयीप्तम i. 10. 

ग्रपहनचेतसां--ा. 44. अपहतज्ञानाः- ४. 15. 
अ्रपात्रेभ्य;--:5५७1 22. 

अपानं--९. 29. अप्ि--1४- 29. 
अ्रपुवरावृत्तिम्‌ “7. 17. . 
अप्रकाशः. 13. 

yaa: —xiv. 13. 

BRAGTA—Aviil. 23. अफलार्काक्षिभिः 2४. Hp T4, 


SF RATT: — i. to 

“SARA — AVL 15. ASTARNI. 3, 4. 
nc =, £+ : 
ZU grempq-— xviii. AS. 


wremq Suo 44, a 


Sea pRA— iii. 8. अभ्यासयोगेन--:. 9. 
zT >. 12 ; XVili. 36. remm — vi 35 
HOTT AIR Siv. 1 1. 

आष्वत्याय--11. 15. SDQQReWp— xiv. A. dg 

zd -—1X. Iy : X. IC : xlii. 12: xiv. 20 
gee sey अश्तापसस्‌- riii. 37, 38. 





ME 


E 
WTA. 65. SpPpeR: V. 12 ; xviii, 28. 
ग्यः — Arundhati-n yaya) Com. ix. 1८ f 


a 
ay XVIL I. 7 


TIJE -xvi y, SICTHW HE — vii. 25. 
2. 5 SAM. २; yi. $45 viii. 10: xviii. fo. 


TREI — ५ P Eb g. 
Pepe te के len T r 
P. s हेडा X 
a et Mnt FET! e art r 
LÀ is x Lal 
BRIA, 25 
- fi 
mmt o xis ac 
P) on कोड an ele ix 
T v. TX - : 
TIT, -- 23; KVL 17, 


ay Sy yea xs SEETSTISI —ii. 17.-qu—ii. 21. 
WIARY us. i6: xvi. 20. 
RRT A Aii. 28. अव्यक्तमूर्तिना ix. 4. 
अन्यन. 1. 24: ४४. 1. 3: XHL 5. अच्यक्तः-11. 25; 
MLL 2८, 21. अच्यक्ता--51. 5. -d—vili. 18, 20. 
; 


आव्य--आचा | INDEX 


C 
=~] 


अव्यक्तासक्ते द्सास--४11. 5 
geai 21 ; iv. 1, 13; 01.10, 24, 25 5 2, 13, 
1 > 2. कवा Oey 2, 50. 
आव्य: xi. 18; Nill. 31; xy. 17. ग्रव्ययात्मा-10. 6. 
अव्यवसायिनाँ-नां. 41 
अशमः ४४ 12. आशान्तस्य- |i. 66. 
SITUE Vul. 15. 
saa iv. 16; ix. 1. अशुभान--हशं. 19. 
SIS vili. 07. 
graa iv. 40. अश्रहासाः- ४. 3. 
अश्वत्यं~४५. I, 3; अवस्यवः. 26. 
असक्तबुद्धिः--४४1. 49. 
असक्तं - अ. gj xiii. Ij. अ्रसक्त —iil. 7, 19, 25. 
अस'कात्मा--०. 21. आसक्तिः. y. 
ऊासमः--1. 16. 
१:प्रसत--5. 19; xili. 12 ; xvii, 28 
असतं. 5. Sreqgurgma—xvi. 10. 
EG eeu umeq:—vi. 2. 
खसंसूहः--४. 20; X. ॐ; XV. Ig. JAREN. +. 
TATA—Vi. 35 5 vii. I. असश. 7 ; Xvi 65, 
qu —1x. 33. 
zrzimA—viii. 18, 19. अहः vill. I7, 24. 
siRNA 111. 27 
हक Sv. 19; xvill. 53, 59. 
graterei—vil. 4 ; ४111. 5. : 
arcane — viii. 58. gigaa- -xviii 17. 
gegen 5; Xil. 7; XVI. 2; XVII. I4 
अप्रहोराचविद:-५1!. 17. 
STST:—XV. 7. 
aye 
आकाशम्यित:-- 5४. 6. आकाशस्‌. 52 
आगमापायन:-11. 14 
DTAT—xiv, 21 ; 3५. 7. ° 


sE 


358 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [_आचा--आप 


Lei ^ » 
ZITATE. 3. -A—i. 2. 
Zi WDAGdgd-—xd. 7 
zrzx--ix. 10 

लिताथिन:-1- 30 : 

SPAR iv. 42; Y. 10 ४. 5, 0. II, 19; vili. I 

X dS NL AIL SPI AWH. T0 Xy 30, 
gregg agpi Com. xvi. 21. 

a4 see * mas 

ऋात्मना--॥. 55: iii. 43 ivi. 5, 6, 20: x. 15 ; xiii, 24,28. 


I) 


TEE 


~ 


ख'्न्ननात्माच a ata Com. xiii 28. 
त्मानि-ां'- २२: i. I7; Iv. 35, 355 v. 21; vi. 18, 20, 
ol 4 E TI. 
अआ्मपरदेद्ेपु--४४. 18. ; 
sragregat avii. 37. 
SARAAT iY. 6. mque. 47. 
SAMA: ili. IT. आत्मसब्तस+-ंए, LI. 
graai. 64. ग्रात्मविनिमहः-- 1. 7; xvii. 16. «» 
आापत्मविसूसयः--5४. 16. Ig. 





कार्म uv आत्मझुद्धये--४- 11. 
आत्मसंयमयेगाशजेौा--५- 27 l 
आत्मान ies E: 15 X 205311. 32. 
मप्रात्मान 43; iv. 7: vL 5, 10, 15, 20, 28, 29; 1x 
31: X. IS: Xl 3, 1; Nill. 24, 28, 29; xviii. 16,5 

अ त्माजच्यस- N. 32. 

grag: iii. 38. 
SSAA I. 37. " 
आदितयवर्ण--४४. 9. आदित्वाच--॥. 6. > 
SISTA —S. 12. आददतः Xl. 36. 
अदिस 5. 15. झादि:--5. 2, 2 G, 32; XV. 3 


अन्तवन्तः", 22. 

Wide. SOS 1 201 5 von 

arpa —(Adhidaivids— आधिभोतिकं-(Adhibbou- 
Ne). आध्यात्मिकं (Adhyitmic). See Com. xiii. 8 

आपस्तम्बचनशास्त्र | , C. /.) Apastamba Dharma 
Shastra]. Com. xviii. 45. 


m Y 


Co 
on) 
co 


ग्राप:--डाच्छ] INDEX 


BTT:—il. 23, 70; vil. 4. 
ग्रात्रह्मसुवनात — viii. 16. 
SIFT-Tq—vil. 22. 
Sisi xiii. 7; कर्णा. 1; xvii. 14; xviii. 42. 
आश्चयेवत--. 29. आश्र्याशि--हां. 6. 
आसुरनिश्चयान्‌. 6. ग्रासुरं-णां. 15; xvi. 6. 
SITG:—xvl. 0. ग्रासुराः:--5५. 7. ग्रासुरी —xvi. 5. 
आसुरीषु-*ण. 19. आसरीम--ए. 12; xvi. 4, 20. 
griega xviii. 42. 
आहारः xvii. 7. SIzmr—xvii. 8, 9. 

z 
इच्छा---४11. 6. इच्छाद्रेषतमुत्येन--९1. 27. 
SS9q—xvii 11, 12. इज्यया. 53. 
इत:--५1. 5; xiv. I. 
seg¢—(Indra)—Com. ix. 20. 
eana: iii. 5. इन्द्रियग्रामं--एं, 24; xii. 4, 
इन्द्रियस्य. 34. इन्द्रियाप्रिघु--1५. 26. 
&tegaram(-—ii. 8, 67; xi. 22. 
इन्द्रियाणि--1. 58, 60,61, 68; iii. 7, 40, 41, 42; iv. 

205 9. 0 Xi. $5 XV. 

afesemra—ii. 6. इन्द्रियार्थेब्य:--1. 58, 68. 
इन्द्रियाथेषु--ए. 9; vi. 4; xhi. 8. 
इन्द्रियेग्य:---111. 42. gfegsp——ii. 64; v. II. 
इष्टकामधुक --11!!. 10. ggg xviii, I2. 
Ei xvii. 64, 70. इष्टानिष्टोपपासिषु--1. 9. 
RERE SEU—Xviil. 9. gST—ixX. 20. 

e 


डू, 





इषणे--हा. 15, 44. 

e sae 

इस्वरभाव:-- ४५०11. 43. 

erqt—xiii. 28. &xqu-iv. 6; xv. 8, 17; xvi. 14; xviii. 61. 


ऊ, 
उग्रकर्मागः--४५. 9. उयरूप:--जां. 3I. 
Sf E—xvii. 10. : 


| SRIMAD-BUAGAVAD-GITA [उत्करा- एवं 


eid ; 


- 


उन्क्रांनानि--५". 3. उत्कामन्त- XV. IO. 

49 —Xiv. 1८. 

sued fp 0 4 115 2; Sv 15 KVL: 
eux. 5. I5 

उत्तय viii. 24; Com. “iil. 25. 
उत्सन्नकुजधर्माणां-- 44. उत्सादनार्थं. 19. 
yang: ii 19. 

उदासींनवत---3. 9; xiv. 23. उदासीनः" g; xii. 16 
SHzZzp[-—xid. 22. 

उपायतः yi. 35 

उपा Upamshu)—Com. xviii. 7o 

उपासते. 14, 15; xli. 2, 0; xiti. 25., 

उपासना-+ Upasanaj—Com. xu. 3 & 4. 

STATE 35. 

उल्बन--1.1. 3 
उराना---“. 3 





k 
5 
7 


d. 
mduap—xv. 1. 
mcq—xii 3; xiv. 18; xv. Com. 2, Z. 
€mEHqr—xi. 22. 

SH. 
WITT त्वा-- Com 32 
SETE:— V. 25; X. 13. TTA: —nxili. 4. gira — xi. 7४. 

ह q. 

एकल्वमास्यित:---श. 31. एकत्वेन. 15. 
Uum. 17. 
Ux. 7, 13; xiii. 30 
एकन्मिन कार्य कृत्सवत xviii. 22 
एक अक्षर (Om j—x. 25. Tari. 13. 
TRA vi. 12. एकायेण-*-5॥11. 72, 
एकांशेन-*. 12. 
gazga rii. 6. 
एवं geniy. 15. 


ऐश्व--कल्या | INDEX 


९9 
=I 
b+ 


w 
प्‌, 
ऐश्वर योग--15४. 5; xi. 8. 
wat रूप--&. 3, 9. 
श्रो 
ST जसा--5५. 13. 
Sirm. 13; xvii. 23, 24. 
START |X. 17. 
अ aa Tawi. 23-0, 
WT. 
Sire —ix. 16. 
क. 
eder. 26. ' 
कमलपत्राक्ष. 2. कमलासनस्य॑--हां. 15. 
करया->५५॥. 14, 18. 
बरूयाः i9: | 
Rayii. 24, 27; xviii. r4, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28. ' 
कलोरं--ए. 13; xiv. 19: xviii. 16. RAV. 14. 
कैमे--1. Com. 47, 493 bis Se 0५1 Come Ep Ss do, 
2415149, Com. 14,15, 10, Come 35, 21, 23 t 7 
IitUl.1,35 णा ट्रा VI 0. 905-23 XVI 27 
xviii. 3 5, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 19, 23, 24, 25, 43; 
44. 47, 48. 
कमप्फलत्यागः--. I2. gigaa r — xvii. 11. 
कूर्मे फलसंयोग--४. 14, Com. 15, कर्मफलहेतु: —i.47. 
कर्म फले--५ 135 ता» कर्मफले". 14. 
कर्मयोग ji - 7. RAT: ei Com. 39, Com. 50: v. 2. 
कर्म ii. 3; xiii. 24. 
SAE: — xviii. 18. 
eeu uem. 2, Com. 6. 
SIEG. 50. ` 
कमानुबन्धीनि-४ए "2. 
कल्पत्षये--15. 7. egis. 7. 
कल्याणएक्रत--४ं . 40. 


^ 


212 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA | कश्म-कृष्णा 


कारने. 2. 

z sor हन्ति कंसा 

FORTAN. 21. कामकामी. 70. 

Faas. 25 

arenaga Ratei. 5“ कामरागविवर्जितं--एशां. 11. 


que di 
ARE = dH. 43. RAEN]. 39. 
कामहत". ४. 
न्यान eee IS. 15 ; XVI. 53. r 


aTa ie. 02: ilL 37; vil. Ir; Xvi. 21. 
कऋाम्य— Kümvaj— Com. v. 13. Raa svili. 2. 
का रययटोपोपरतस्वभाव:-!. 7. 
FARTURA Nİ. 20. 
Frai. 17. 19: Vb 1; xviii S, 9, 31. 
काःयाकायव्यवन्थितो XV. 24. siam xviii. 30. 
काले". 23. कालः--5- 30, ३3; xi. 32 
कऋकालतानलसानभाचवच-5ा. 25. 
कान --ण!!. 23 : xvii. 20. -q—iv. 2, 38 
किल्बियस--1ए. 21; xviii. 47. ( सर्वे-) किल्बिबेः-1. 13. 
करूनत्र--. I. á 
कुरुनन्दन 41; VL 43; xiv. 13.-प्रवीर-ां. 48 वृद्ध 
L 12--अश्ू--४- 19.-सत्तम--1५. 31. कुरूस--1.- 15 

कुनक्षवकुने--.- 3 5. 39. कुलक्षय. 40. 
कुलञ्नाना-. 42, 43 
HATA: —i 29,43. FA 40. कुले--४. 42 
FRAIR. 35 
Brey x. 3: कूटस्थः". 8; xv. 16. 
FIFA XV. 22. 
FARIA —iv. 18. gr gH—iii. 29. 
कुपया--!. 27: ii. I. 

PATS STR xvii 44 
PTI. 20, 31, 415 V. 15 Vi. 34,37, 39 ; xi. 41 : xvii. I. 
Ln लच्या SSH vi. 25; xviii. 78. 
T ४701. 735. 


शी 


Fari: | INDEX 373 


कललं. 21; xvii. 16. केवल्ले:--४. 11. 
TRNA—i. 30; 1. 54; 11. 1; X. Ij. -स्य xi. 35. 
कु केषु भावेषु--«. I7. 
क्रतुः. 16. १ 
क्रियामि:--5ं. 48. क्रियाविशेषबहलां-. 43. 
ऋध्‌“. 18; xviii. 53. 
ऋः. 62; iil. 37 ; xvi. 4, 21. SETqrar—ii. 63. 
emu. 3. 
क्षत्रियस्य-. 31. क्षत्रियाः. 32. 
त्तमा. 4, 34; Xvi. 3. wRT—xil. 13. 
wE—xv. I8. quv-—viii. 4 ; xv. 16. 
ज्ञात्रं RINVII 43. 
fed: —xXill. 7; Xviti, 42, 
तेवक्षतत्रज्ञयी:- Alli, 2, 34. wur TE AAA —siii, 26, 
सेरे. 2, Spill 1. 
स्त्र, 1, 3, 6, 18, 33. कती. 33. 
q. 
w—vii, 4. @—vii. 8, r 
3T. 
Vera gm xvili, 73. 
3T Tq — ix, 21. 
ipe — viii. 26. 
miz दधारमि-- ४, 3. शभे: 38. 
शडाकेश--5. 20; xi, 7. गुडाकेश? — 11. 9. 
yupi- aiii, 28.-विभागश:--४. 13.-8-iii,29, 
सणा-प्रवृद्धा:*-४ए. 2. -gxi 14, -म्यी- शा. 14, 
-म्ये:--ए. 13. -संग:--511॥, 21, -संसूढा:-- 1, 29, 
-संख्यानें-- 5४11, 19. 
srame:—xiv, 25, ] 
WUTA—xili, 19, 21; xiv, 20, 21, 26, 
irmrp:—iii, 28 ; xiv, 5, 23. 
शुगघु--1, 28. zrüpesp— xiv, 19, 
3H: — lii, 5, 27 ; viii, 23; xiv. 233 xviii, 40, 41, 


27 


274  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [गुरू-जना 


शुरुरगरीयास--४, 43. TSH. 5 | 

शह्यतमें- 5. 1; XV. 20 शह 15 XVI, 68, 75, + 
sm ap —cvii 03. शुह्याचा = 38, 

गोविन्द. 32; गावन्द--॥. 9 

्रसमानः--51. 30. झासेंष्णु--<10. I 6 

TAIT lV. 7. 


ध. a | 
घोरं--51. 49. xvii, 5. चारे. 1, 
urq:—i. 19. 

च. 


Hill. 16. swfegüp— xi. 17. 
चतुर्विधं (HAR )—xv. 14 
चराचरस्य. 43. चराचर--2. 39 
"Tere HT «0 — Vl. 37 
aigawa—iv. 13. m 
चान्द्रमसं ज्यात :-- ५11. 25. 
चित्तसू--श॑. 18, 20; xil. 9. 
Parqra—xvi. 11. चिन्तय:--£. 17, 
ब्बतना--४. 22: xiii. 6. 
चअलाजिनकुशों चरं--शं, 11. 
aafeq—iX. 24. 

e. 
ऊन्दसा--5 . 35. छन्दांसि--5०. r. 
छिन्न-दघाः--४- 25. -ANA — XVIIL. IO. 

ST. m 
जगतः--ए॥1- 0; viii. 26: ix. 17 ; xvi. 9 
जयत--- शा. 5, 13; IX. 4, 10; X. 42 ; हा. 7, 13, 30, 36 

xv, 12; xvi. 8. , 

SMITA X. 15. जगन्निवास. 25, 37, 45. 
जनकादयः. 20. 
जनसंसांदे--॥11. 10. 
जनार्दैन--. 36, 39, 445 lll. 1; X. I8 ; xi, 5r. 


अन्म-तत] INDEX 375 


जन्म-- 1. 27; 1v. 4, 9; vi. 42 ; vill. 15, 16. -AT—vii. 19. 
-fa—xvi. 20. ज्न्मानि--1५४. 5. 
जन्मकर्मफलप्रदास--1. 43. जन्मबन्धविनिमुक्ताः--1ां. 51. 
जन्मग्त्युजराव्याधिदुःखदेषानुदर्शनं-- ४111. 8. 
जपयज्ञ:--5. 25. जपं (Japa)-xvili. 70. Com. 
जयः--४. 36. जयाजयो--1. 38. 
जरा. 13. जरामरणमोक्षाय". 29. 
Seq (Jalpa)—x. 32. Com. 
जातिधमो:--. 43. 
ÉSTRITEE: —vi. 44; vii. 16. 
जितात्मनः--शं. 7. fstateqr—xviii. 49. 
जितेन्द्रिय:--५. 7. 
जीव-भूत:--57. 7. -pgt—vii. 5. 
जुहोषि--5. 27. weta—iv. 26, 27, 29. 
ज्ञान-गम्यम--॥(11. 17. “TAT: —Xv, 10. -चक्षषा--॥111.3 4. 
* -तपसा-४. 10. -difqq-—iv. 27. -erqq—x. 11. 
-निर्धूतकल्मघाः--४. 17. -घुवेन-४. 36. 
जान-यज्ञ:--1ए. 33. -यज्ञेन--175. 15 ; xviii. 70. 
ज्ञान-योगव्यवस्थिति:--&५1. 1. -यांगन--1. 3. 
कसानवता--5. 38. ज्ञानवान्‌. 33; vii. 19. 
जानविज्ञान-नृप्तात्मा--शं. 8. -नाशनं-र्‍, 41. 
Hla-daa—xiv. 6. -संलिन्नसंरायम--¡४. 41. 
सानम-- 11. 39, 40; iV. 34, 39; V. 15, 16; vil. 2 ; ix. 1; 
X. 4, 38; Xll. I2 ; xlii, 2, 11, 17, 185 xiv. 1, 2, 
. 9) 11, 17; XV. 15: xvili, 18, 19, 20, 21, 42, 63. 
क्ानाग्रिदश्धकर्माएं--1०- 19. smarfir.—iv. 37. 
ज्ञानावस्यिढ् चेतस:--1ए. 23. ज्ञानासिना--10. 42. 
ज्ञानिनः. 39 ; iv. 34 ; vii. 17. 
ज्ञानिभ्यः". 46. ज्ञानी--णा. 16, 17, 18. 
ज्ञाने--1४. 33. ज्ञानेन-- 10. 38; v. 16. 
ज्यातिषा--%. 21; xiii 17. ° 
ज्योतिः. 24, 25; xiii, 17. 
त. 
ततस्‌--ii, 17; Vill, 22: ix. 4; xi, 39 ; xviii, 46, 


DIU SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [तव- व्यक्त 

नत्यरः-- 1". 39. तत्परायणा:--४५. 17. 

तस्वज्ञानार्थदर्शन- डा. 11. n 

q«q:—iv. 9; Vl. 21; vii. 3; X. 7 ; xviii. 55. 

तच्च-दर्शिचः--10- 34. xDD. 16. -fqa—iii. 28; 
v. 8. -g—xviii. 1. 7 


emp--xvii. 27. 

तटात्मान:--''. 17. dzsu:—V. 17. : 

तजावभावितः-- ५111. 6. qfagr—v. 17. 

लनुस्‌-४ii. 21; IX. 11. 

aqar— xi. 53. quis —xvii. 27. 

तपस्विभ्यः 46. aqferg—vii. 9. 

तपः i. 9: X. 5; xvi. 1; xvii. 5, 7, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 28 : xviii. 5, 42. 

qW:u—vii. 28. quIpr:—xi. 48. 

aqqraar:—iv. 28. 

qug:—vii. 9: xiii. 17 ; xiv. 16, 17. तमसा xviii. 32. 
समासि xiv. 13, 15 

TT:—x. IT; xiv. 5,8, 9, IO; xvii, 1. 

तमोंद्वारः--5शं. 22 

ATA—vi. 40 

तामसम्रियं--४"ा. 10 

qAA—svil. I3, I9, 22; xviii. 22 25, 39. araq:— 
xvii. 7, 28. तामसा:--णां. 12 - xiv. 18 ; Xvil. 4. 
तामसां--5"11. 2 ; xviil. 32, 35 

तुल्य-नन्दात्मसस्ता[त:--ऱआां/. 24 'ॅनन्दास्वात:-->11. 19. 

तुल्यापरयामय:-- iV. 24. qw-—xiv. 25 2 

तुट: =. 5. तुष्यान्ति--5. 9 

तष्णासगससुद्धवं xiv. 7. 

तेजस्विना ii. 15: x. 36 

तज:- शा, 9, 10; X. 365 xv. 12: xvi. 3; xviii 4. 

त आमय. 47. qSIRIIST—Xl. 17 

PRISTSDTQH-—X. 4I 

सक्तसवेप्रिभ्रहः--15. 21, 


स्याग--दुःखे] INDEX 


oO 
-1 
क्यु 


SITIO —xviii. 8. 

व्यागहस्य-छुपणों, 1. emWp—sxvil. 2, 8. त्यागः ऽ". 2; 
xviii. 4, 9. त्यागात“. 12. त्यागी-- इ". 10, 
11. ar xviii. 4. Sis —xviii. 3, 5. 

अयीधमंस--17:. 21. 3 

चेसुशयविषया:--. 45. 

न्नलोक्यराज्यस्य--. 35. 

औविद्या:--15. 20. 

स्वस्‌ समः न gaS. 43. 

qa. 

zeqi—xii. 16. 

दक्षिणायनं-- ५1. 25. 

SHN:—X. 4; Xvi. I; Xvili. 42. 

दम्भमानमदान्विता:-5एं. 10. @A:— xvi. 4. दम्भार्थ-- 
xvii, I2. दम्भाईकारसंयुक्ताः-झेशों. 5. दम्भेन 

^ xvi. 17; Xvi. 18. 

दया--%४1. 2. 

zy:—xvi. 4. @—xvi. 18; xvii. 53. 

eTasq—xvii. 20. दार्नुक्रयाः-- 5711. 25. 

दानं--5. 5; xvi. 1 ; xvii. 7, 20, 21, 22: Xvill. 5, 43. 

दाने--5णां. 27. दानिन-- 5. 53. aay —viil. 28. दाने 
xi. 48. epearia—xvi. 15. 

f&f4—ix. 20; xi. 12 ; xviii. 40. 

दिव्यम--1ए. 9; viii. 8, 10; x. 12; xi. 8. 

दिव्यानां-2. 40. Remixi 5. दिव्याच्‌-।४. 20; 
xig 15. दिव्याः-2. 16, 19; दिव्यो. 14. 

Zriusxt—«viii. 28. 

दुष्कृतां. 8. दुष्कृतिनः. 15. 

दुःख-योनयः. 22. -शोकामयप्रदाः- XV]. 9. -सं योग- 
बियोगं-॥. 23. -gr—vi. 17. 

wim—yv. 6; vi. 32; X.4; xii. 5; xiii 6; xiv. 105 
xviii. 8. 

दुःखात. 36 दुःखालयं ii. 15. 

डुःखेन--शं. 22. दुःखेषु. 50. , 


JiS SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [zz — धन 


रह-निश्चयः~ 5. 14. -HAT:—vil. 28 ; IX. I4. 

ze—vi. 34; xvili: 64. 

a—xi 15, 44, 45. éqdr:—iv. 12. 

देवदेव--5- 15. देवदेबस्थ- x . I3. 

देवहिजयुरुप्रासपूजनं Sil. 14. 

देवयज:ः--ए. 23. Deva-Yajna—iii. 13. Com. 

देवयान--(Deva-Yana)—viii. 25. Com. 

देवत्रता£- 15. 25. 

By—xi. II, 14. €ATq[—X. 2, 22. देवास. II; vii. 
23: ix. 25; xl. 15; xvii. 4. देवाः-iii. Ir, 12; 
X. I4; Xi. 52. &qSg—xviii. 40. 

देवेश- कां. 25. 37, 45- 

zg-qatr— svii. 11. cgqt—viii 4. -ya—xiv. 14. -वड्धिः 
— xii. 5. 

देहसमुद्भवान्‌ Siv. 20. 

देहान्तरप्राप्तिः:-- 1. 13. 

देहिन. 40; xiv. 5, 7. &f&qt—xvii. 2. &'g3:—it. 
15, 59. &dl—il. 22, 30; V. 13 ; xiv. 20. , 

wq—iv. 25: xviii. I4. द्वैवः— xk 6. 

wát—vii. 14; xvi. 5. 

waf—ix. 13: Xvi. 3, 5. 

ayaa riii. s. दोषं. 38, 39. Aey—xviii. 48. 

दोषः. 43. 

द्यावाप्राथेव्यो:--51. 20. 

ब्रब्ययज्ञा:-- 10. 28. r N 

gera —vii. 28. ^ 

gaira nii. 27. 

इन्दातीत:--ए. 22. Tax:—xv. 5. 

दिजात्तम--. 7. 

fuii. 6. हटि. 57; v. 3; xii, 17; XiY.22; Xviii, IO 

K*3:—v1. 9; IX. 29. 


"iu 


e 
e 


m 


F. 
प्नमानमदाल्विता:--5एं, 17, 


r 


धने-निगृही] INDEX 379 


धनंजय--1. 48, 49; iv. 47; vii. 7; ix. 9; xii. 9 ; xviii. 
29,72. धनंजयः--. 15: X. 37 ; Xl. 14. 
WHERTRTZIT x viii. 34. 
धमक्षेतरे--. 1. 
धर्मसंमूढचेताः. 7. ^ 
धमेसंस्थापनाथोय--1५. 8. 
que —ii. 40; iv. 7 : ix. 3; xiv. 27. 
x8—ii. 7. Com. ; xviii. 31, 32. 
JATT —İX. 31. 
Wargs—xii. 20. 
धर्माविरुद्धः. 17, धर्मे-. 4०, 
धर्म्य. 33; ix. 2; xviii, 70, म्यात्‌ —ii, ३7. 
धातार, 17; X, 33. धातारं. 9. 
धीरस्‌, 15. घीरः--नों., 13 ; xiv, 24, 
yar—viii, 25, धूमेन--1. 38 ; xviii, 48. 
"dfsq—xi. 24. qfq:—x. 34; xiii, 6; xvi, 3; xviii, 33; 
34, 35, 43. Tai—xvili, 29. wem-—xviii, 33, 
` 34, 57. 
धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः--2 १1, 26, 
घ्यानयोंगपरः--४४17, 52. 
घ्यानं, ध्यानात्‌. 12, eaaa xiii, 24. 
ण्‌. 
न अभिनन्दति. 57, 
न करोति न लिप्यते. 31. . 
न देष्टि नु,कांक्षति--५. 3. 
नरकस्य-%४।. 21, नरकाय-¬. 42. नरके. 44; xvi, 16, 
नराधमाच्‌-2ण. 19, नराधमाः ण. 15. 
नवद्वारे पुरे (i. e., in the body)—v, 13. 
नष्टाव्मानः-2५।. 9. 
नानाभावान्‌-2४॥ii, 21, 
नायं लोकोऽस्त्ययञज्ञस्य-i४. 37. 
नासिकार्य--शं. 15. 
निशुहीतानि--7i. 68. | : 


* 





380 | SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [निम्र--निर्वास 


Raisi. 34. निम्रहः- iii. 33. 

नित्यकर्म Nitra Karma )—v. 13. Com. ^ 

निद्यजातं fae वा waa Xc.—ii. 26. Com. 

facqu:—iv. 20. n 

नित्व-युक्तस्य--५॥1. 14. -युक्तः--णां. 17. -युक्ता:--15. 14; 
yii. 2. 

नित्ववेरिणा-- 11. 39. -Xr—viii 14. -सत्तवस्था--. 45. 

नित्यसंन्यासी--४- 5. ह 

frarq—ii. 18. नित्यं. 21, 26, 30; iii. 15, ३37; ix, 
0०:३0) Nic sets Bilis 93 कणा. 32. 

raaq:—il. 20, 24. 

निद्याभियुक्तानाँ--15. 22. 

निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्यं--5 णं. 39. 

निधानं--15. 18; xi. 18, 38. 

निर्मित्तमात्रे--5. 33. मु 

नियतमानस:--४ां. 15. 

नियतस्य duri xviii. 7. 

नियत. 44; iii, 8; xviii. 9, 23: 

faaara: viii. 2. 

नियताहारः". 29. 

नियमस--४71. 20. 

निरग्निः. 1. 

निरहंकारः. 71; xii. 13. 

निराशी:-iii. 30; iv, 21: vi. ro. 

निराश्रय:--10. 20. ह i 

निराटारस्य--. 59. Š 

maea—vi. 20. fquex—viii. 12. 

Ruata —siii. oT. Fre —xiii, I4. 

निन्द. 45; v. 3. 

Fiai. 7I; 1. ३०; xii, 13; Nv 53. 

तिमानमोहा:--5५. 5. 

नि्यागत्तम:--1. 45. 

निर्वाखपरमां--॥1. rs. 


n 


'निरबि-परि | INDEX 381 


निर्विक्कार:ः— "iii. 26. 

निर्वदस-५11. 52. 

निर्वेर:--४1. 55. 

faata—xvi. 7; xviii. 30. 

निशा-- 1, 09. ^ 

sri. 3; xvii. 1; xviii. 50, 

निस्थ्षेशुशय:--1. 45. 

सिःग्रेयसकरोी--४- 2 

निःस्पृहः. 71; vi. 18. 

नीति:--5. 38; xviii. 78 

aqaa:—(Nri-Yajna)—Com, iti. 13 

नेष्कम्येसिद्धि--०1. 49. नेष्कम्यंमू-- 1. 4 

नैमित्तिक HA—(Naimittika Karma)—Com. v. 13. 

नेष्ठिकीस-४- 12. 

eqnq—xvili. 2. 

li q. 

qfirgqu—iv. 19. qRresr:—ii. 11; v. 4, 18. 

q&—ii. 51; viii. I1; xv. 4, 5 ; xviii. 56. 

परधर्मः. 35. परघर्मोत--. 35 ; xviii. 47. 

प्रमहेसपरित्राजकः-- (Paramahamsa-Paribrajaka) 
Com. xviii. 53 

qup Wm-viii. 21; xv. 6. 

पृरमात्मा--॥ए. 7; xiii. 22, 31 ; XV. 17 

चरमां गति--ए11. r3, 21. 





* 





. -4—xiii. 27 
qi—wqm—x.12;xi -अहा--5. 12; xiii. 12. -निधाने 
—xi. 18, 38 


प्रम्पराप्राप्त -10. 2 

परा गाति--\।. 45 ; ix. 32; Xili. 28; xvi. 22, 23. 
qRag— xiii. 53. > 
qadri xiii. 44. 

परिणाम विषामिव---४५11. 38. 


क्रिप्रश्मेन--1५. 34. R 
28 °? 


882  SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [पर्यु--पूका 


वर्युपासते--ए. 25; ix. 22 ; xii. 1, 3, 20. 

पावे. 38; ix. 2, I 72 XV 12 d 

पश्यतः मुनेः. 69. 

Sra —xvil. 20. 

पापळुत्तमः-- 1९. 36. परापयोध/यः--15. 32. 

पार्प--. 36, 45; 1. 33, 38; ii. 36; v. 15 ; vii. 28, 

पापात्‌--!. 39. uwrmqr:—iii. I3. पापेन--४. 10. 

पापेभ्यः. 36. पापेषु". 9. qreqrq—iii. 41 ० 

पितर:--1. 34, 42. पिता-नंड, 17; xi. 43, 44 ; xiv. 4 

Maaa: (Pitri- Yajna)— Com. iii, ra tigara (Pitri- 
ána)— Com. viii पिंतृत्रताः- 15. 25. 

MFU. 29. fqqs—i. 26 ; ix. 25. 

पुणयकमंण[--॥॥1. 28 ; xviii. 71 

पुएयकृता---॥. 4I. FWaRA—viii. 28 

उणय--15. 20; xvii. 76. पुण्यः". 9. qxrem—ix.33. 

पुणये--i४. 21 ^ 

पुनजेन्म--1ए. 9; vili. 15, 16. पुनरावर्तिन:--श॥ं, 16 

SNuI—Vvil. 9. पुराणः--1. 20; xi. 38. qeratt—xv. 4. 

पुरातन:--10 

उरुषषंभ--11. 15. पुरुषव्याघ्र-- णा. 4. 

जुरुषस्य-7. 60. पुरुषं-नी, 15 ; viii, 8, 10; x. 12; xiii. 
19, 23; XV. 4 

S&83:—1i. 21; iii. 4; viii. 4, 22: xi, 18 39; xiii. 20, 

2I, 22 ; XV. 17 ; XVII पुरुषा TIA, 3 

` पुरुषोत्तम. 1; x. 15; xi 3. -H—xv. 19 

पुरुषांत्तमः--5ए- 18. TRYT—xv. 16. Fe—v. 13 

पूतषापा:-५. 20. Tay:—iv. 10. 

Gaq:—iii. 19, 36. 

पूर्वाभ्यासेन--एं. 44 

पृथकलन--15. 15; xviii. 21 9. 

पारु". 8; xviii, 25 

पौरवदेहिक--शं 43 

THIMT— iv. 22, 


c 


o3 


qz—ud| INDEX 83 
qy- riii. 21. -xp—iii. 5; xviii. 40. -संभवात- 
Si 10. -&DWAT:.— xiv, 5. -स्थः XN, 21 -स्थानि 

—xv. 7. प्रकाते-111. 33; iv. 0; vil. 5; IX. 7; 8, 
I2, 13: Xl. 51; Xlil. 19, 23. 

प्रकृति: शा. 4; ix. 10; xiil. 20; xviii. 59. प्रक्रत ui, 
27, 29, 33; ix. 8. W9RSIT— Vli, 20 ; xiii. 29. 

stqÍq:—-iii. 10, 16 Com. ; xi. 39. 

ग्रज्ञा:--iii. 10, 24; X. 6 

Tati. 57, 58, 61, 68, -वादान i. 11. -q4—ii. 67. 

quwiqa — xi. 42. i 

qaa: — vii. 8., 

qrürqras—iv. 34. 

stes —3ávii, 65. 

भत्यक्षावगमे —ix. 2. 

waarena—(Pratyagdtman)— Com. xiv. 27. 

प्र्ययाय:--7. 40 

srarzm:—(Praty&hára)— Com. ii. 58 

प्रत्युवकाराथ-5शों. 21 

ग्रापतामहः- 39 

प्रभवं --5. 2. प्रभवः-- शां. 6; ix. 18; x. 8. 

प्भाविष्शु- iii. 10 

q:—V. 14; 15. 1 8, 24. प्रभो. 4; XIV. 21 

भ्रमादर्मा हॉ ४1४. 17 

प्रमाद:-:51ए. 13. प्रमादातू- Xİ. 41. THIX—XlV. 9 

gqarereaatsgri—xiv. 8 

प्रयतात्मनः. 26 

प्रयाणकाले". 30; vill. 2, IO 

TAA: —vili. 23, 24, 25 Com. प्रयात. 5 

प्रलये--४ा ०. 14, I5. प्रलयः-- V1 6 ; ix. 18 

qaerareqt—xvi. 11. प्रलये- xiv 2. 

Sadq—vV. 14; 5. 8 प्रवर्तितं akii, 16 

qq —xi. 31; xiv. 22 ; Xvi. 7} XVII, 50. 

प्रवृत्ति. 12 ; XV, 4; XVI 40 e 


384 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA  [प्शा-बुद्धि 


प्रशान्त-मनसम्‌". 27. -स्य--शं. 7. प्रशान्तात्मा-- vi. 14. 

प्रसन्नचेतसः. 65. प्रसन्नाल्मा-- उणा. 54. á 

भ्रसादे-- 1. 64. प्रसादे- 1, 65. 

प्रहसन--1. 10 

प्राशं. 29; vill, 10, 12. प्राणान-1., 33; 1९. 29 

प्राणापान-गती:--1!0. 29. HEIC EV. 14 

प्राशापाना-". 27. 

TAUMAIA: — iV. 29. i 

mt —iv. 29. starg—iv 29. 

प्रिये--४. 20. fiii—vii. 17; xi, 44; Xll 14, 15, 16, 
17, 19 ; xvii, 7 ; xviii. 65 

प्रिय: (न मे अस्ति )—ix. 29. प्रियाः 2, 20 

प्रीतिपूवैकं-5, 10. प्रीतिः- 1. 36 


फ. 
फलहेतवः. 49 है 
फलमस--1. 51 ; V. 4; vil. 23; ix. 26; xiv 16 ; xvii, 12 
21, 25; xviii. 9, 12, RAA —Xv1L 6. फले". 
12. फलेषु. 47. फलाकाङ्च्ी- vii. 34 
ब्र. 
agīt:—xvi. 12, THIfa—xiv. 6. बध्यते. 14. 
qeq—xviil. 30. sedqra—v. 3. 
qa—i. 10; vil. 11 ; xvi. 18; xviii, 53 
Wegup-—ix. 15; 5111. 4. JEX. 42 ü 
बहान जन्मात--1'. 5 बहूना जन्मन[ ४11. 19, ^ 
बाह्यस्वशीषु--7. 27. बाह्यान्‌ स्वणांत--ए. 27. © 
बीजप्रदः--5"- 4. बीजम--शों, 10; ix, 18; x. 39, 
बुद्धिमाह्मस्‌- Vi 21 
बुद्धिनाशः, 63. बुद्धिनाशात्‌. 63 
बुद्धिभेदं. 26 
डुद्धि-मतां-४।. 10. -मात--४. 18; xv. 20. -युक्तः 
50, 57.-योगे--5. 10; xviii, 57. -योगात-- 1i. 49. 
-Rivi 43.°-A—ili. 2 ; xii. 8, 


बुद्धि:-भयात] INDEX 385 


gfa:—ii. 39, 41, 44 52, 53» 65, 66; iii. I, 40, 42; 
vif 4, IO; X. 4 ; xlii. 5 ; xviii. 17, 30, 31, 32- 
बुद्धेः प्रत:- 11. 42. बुद्धेः qi—iii. 43. 
बुद्धौ ~. 49. gri. 39 ४. 11; vi. 25; xviii. St. 
qq:—v. 22. बुधाः 1५. 19; X. 8. 
8gr—iii. 15; iv. 24, 31; V. 6, 19; vii. 293 vill. 1, 3, 
13,424 ; X. 12; Xiii. 12, 30; xiv. 4 ; xviii. 50. 
Seri —xvili. 42. -समाधिना--1ए. 24. 
sgrerd—viii. rr; xvii. 14. 
ब्रह्म चारिब्रते--४- 14; See Com. vili. II. 
ब्रह्मणः--।४- 32; vi. 38; viii. 17 ; xi. 37 ; xiv. 27 ; xvii. 
23. ब्रह्मणा--1ए. 24. ब्रह्मणशि--४. 10, 19, 20. 
ब्रह्मनिर्वाण. 72 ; V. 24, 25, 26. 
बह्मय-भूत॑ं+-शं. 27. -भूत:-ए. 245 xviii. 54. -भूयाय--2४. 
26 ; xviii. 53. gt: — (Brahma-Yajna)— Com. 
iii, 13. 
बह्म-यागयुक्तात्मा--९. 21. -arzai—xvii. 24. 
ब्रह्म-वित--४. 20. -fqa:—viii. 24. -संस्पर्श--ए1. 28. 
ब्रह्मसूत्र पदैः. 4. 
HEIZI—bv. 24, 25. ब्रह्माणस--४ं. 15. ब्रह्मोद्भवं. 15. 
बाह्मणक्षत्रियाविशा--“९11. 41. ब्राह्मणस्य. 40. ब्राह्मणाः 
—ix. 33; xvii. 23. ब्राह्मश--४. 18. 
ब्राह्मी स्विति: 72. 
s H. ^ 
Whi — iv 3 ; Vil. 21; IX. 3I. 
WAT: —ix.733 ; Xi. I, 20. 
भक्ति-मान-- आ. 17, 19. -योगेन--४17. 26. 
भाक्त". 68. wfsg:—xiii. ro. AFAT—vill. 10, 22 5 
ix. 14, 26, 29; Xi. 545 xviii. 55. 
भवत्युपहृतं--125. 2 6. 
YRTIQqS—X. 14, 17. 
भजति--शं, 31; XV. I9. 
ayq—x, 4; xvill, 35. नयात ii. $5, 40. 


386 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [भयाः--मसः 


wWarya—xvili. 30. भयावहः. 35. 

भवः--5. 4. WATOTAI—XÍ. 2. 

भावना-- 1. 66. भावसमान्विताः--5. 8. 

भावं णा. 15, 24; viii. 6 ; IX. II; xviii. 20. 

भावः. 16 ; vili. 4, 20; xviii. I7. भावा:--शां, 12; 
X. 5. भावेषु :—vii. 13. 

भासः. 12, 30. wri—xi. 12 

भूत-गरान--उणा. 4. -HTWH-—ix, 8 ; xvii. 6, -पामः--शा 

. -प्रकृतिमोक्षे — xiii, 34. 

भृत-भते -- 11. I6. -Waa—ix. 5; X. 15. 

भूत-भावोद्ववकर:--11. 3. -भृत--5., 5. -महेम्धरं--४. 11. 

भूतयज्ञ:-- (Bhuta-Yajna)— Com. iii. 13 

भूत-विशेषसंघान--४1. 15. -aatf—xvi. 6. 

भृत-स्थ:--15. 5. -H—x, 39. भूतादि, 13 

भूतानि. 28, 30, 34, 69; iti. 14, 33; iv, 35; vii. 6 
26; viii. 22 ; ix. 5, 6, 25 ; XV. 13, 16 

Watat—iv. 6 ; x, 5, 20, 22; xi. 2 ; xiii, 15 ; xviii. 46. 

भातिः xviii. 78, 

भूतेज््या:--15, 25. प्रतेश--5. 15° wqu—vi. 11; viii. 
20; xiii. 16,27; xvi.2; xviii. 21, 54. 

WT भत्वा--ण्या. 19. 

ufa:—vii, 4, war—ii. 8. 

भेच् ग. 5 

भोक्ता, 24; xiii. 22. भोक्तारं. 2 9 

भागान्‌--1. 5; Hl. 12. भोगा:- 1. 33 ; ४. 22. भोगी £-5ए. 
14. भोरो:--. 32 

भाराश्वय-गातस--11. 43. -प्रसक्ताना--1 44 

भाजेनम --50॥1, IO 

वीः. 27; viii. 10, 


yp 








Lud 


F. 
WÍSrq:— vi. 14; xviii. 57, 58 मचित्ता:--£- 9 
अत्कमं-कुतू-! -पृरम:--511. IO 
FMV. 7, 12; २.५, 8: xv. 15 


त्व- मरायोगे] INDEX 387 


मत्पृरम:-- Xi, 55. AeqTAT:—xii. 20. मत्वरः:-- 1. 61; vi. 
IB XVii. 57. मत्वरायण:-- 1. 34. मत्पराः. 6. 
मत्प्रसादात्‌---»0ए1!. 56, 58. 

मत्सस्थाम्‌ - Vi. 15. मत्स्थानि--5. 5, 6. 

ATIN-—ix. 27, ) 

Wun—xvlii. 55, 

मदाश्रयः. I, महुतप्राणा:--5. 9. महतेन--शं, 47. 
RMI IX. 34; Xl. 55 ; xii. I4, 16 ; xiii. 18 ; xviii. 65. 
AEM: vill. 23. मङ्भाक्ति-- "i. 54. qa *Rg —xviii. 68. 
WRIA iV. 10; vill. 5 ; xiv, 19. 

agTara—xili. 18. agrar—x. 6. 

WISIS: iX. 25. 
WERWTH—Xxii 11. मदृव्यषाश्रयः-- 5011. 56. 
मनसा--1!!. 6, 7; v. I1, 13 ; Vi, 24; vill. IO. 
मनस:--111. 42. 








qHq:—i. 30; il. 60, 67 " lii. 40, 42 ; Y. 19; vi. I 2, 14, 
25, 26, 34, 35 ; Vil. 43 vill, 12; X. 22; Xl, 45; 
X 3055x905 XUL TT TATATS AAV. 16. 
मनःप्राणेन्द्रियाक्रिया:-- xviii 33. मन:घष्ठानीन्द्रियांणि--5५- 7. 
मनीबिणः--ii. 51; xviii. 3. मनीषिणा-—४४iii. 5. 
. मनुष्यलोके 2५. 2 
मनोगतान. 55. मनोरथे 2. 13. 

adayi, 13. WeW:—iX. 1 6 
Weqqr:—ix, 34; xviil. 65. RERA: =V. 10 
मम वत्मायुवर्त iv. 11. मम सनातनः अशः 4९ 
मथ्यपितमनोज्ञाद्ध 0111. /, AM. 14 
मत्यलोकं--ड. 27. मर्वेषु--* 
महतो भयांत्‌-7. 40 
महदत्रह्म--४1ए. 3. महद्योनिः-- जाण 4 
महात्मनः. 12; xviii, 74. महात्मन x 20, 35 
महात्मा--णा. 19; Xl. 50. महात्मानः 15; 1x13 
agyara xiii. 5 
gA Xi. 9. ; : 


^ 


388 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-CITA [महा माञ्च 


HETUT:—i. 4, 17. महारथाः---. 0; 1, 35. 

मरेश्वरः-- 1. 22. ह 

ATaT-—1x. 17. 

माचास्पर्शा:-- ii, 14. 

माधव--1. 37. माधवः---. ^4. 

मानसं (Mánasa)-— Com. xviii. 70, मानसं gq: xvii. 16. 

मानसाः जाताः--5- 6. . 

मानापमानयोः--॥. 7; xli. 18; xiv. 25. . 

मानुर्षी agara ( माम्‌ )—Àx, 11. 

मायया--४।. 15; xviii. 61. माया, मायां--४।।. 14. 

मार्गशीषेः--2- 35. 

मादात्म्यस--51. 2. 

माम--ग्रनुस्मर-- 1. 7. --अ्रदस्मरत vil. 13, ““एव 
स्मरन-५॥1. s. —dumfa—viii r4. -RAT न 
लिपन्ति--५- 14. ~न Rana- ix. 9. भजन्ति 
—vi. 31; ix, 29. 

मामेकं शरणं aa xviii, 66. मामेव प्रपद्मन्ते---४, 14. 

मामेव एष्यासि--ए 1, 7 ; ix. 34; xviii. 65. qTH[q -—xi. 55. 

मित्रारिपक्षयोः qem—xiv. 25. fau—xii. 18. 

favar—xviii. 59. मिथ्याचारः. 6. 

मुक्तसंग:---111. 9 ; xviii, 26. 

WHREY—iv. 23. g«R:—v. 28; xil. 15; xviii. 71. 

gqm:—xiv. 1. सनिः. 56; v. 6, 28; x. 26. 

सुनीना--%. 37. gs:—it. 69; vi. 3. 

सुसुक्ञाभिः--।४. 15. 

qeaitay—xiv. 15. " 

सूढः--४।1. 25. WST—vil. 15; ix. II; xvi. 20. 

सूलानि--2४. 2. 

सृत्युसंसार-वर्त्मनि--2. 3. -सागरातयों, 7. 

सृत्यु--हझा1., 25. epi. 27 ; IX. 19; x. 34. 

war—x. 34. Gardt—xviii. ro. 

Aari, 13. 

होच्चकांच्षिभिः--2४. 25. मौज्परायण:--९. 28. 


ra 


मोचु--यणश: | INDEX 389 


Atara xviii. 66. avili. 30. 

मोघ-कमी —Àx. 12. >ज्ञाना:--ं5. 12. मोघाशाः ix. 12. 
मोह-कलिलस--1. 52. -जालसमावृता:-- 5९. 10. 
मोहनस--४ए. 8; xviii. 39. W[E—v. 35 5 xiv. 22. 
मोंड:----डा. I; xiv. I3 ; xviii. 73. 

मोहात्‌ -xvi 10; xviii. 7, 25, 60. 

f g am पोनी x 

lu --x..38; xvii. 16. मोनी शा. 19. 


थ्‌. 

यच्छूद्रः XV. 3. 
ARAARA: İV. 30. यज्ञवपसाम्‌ भोक्तारें--४- 29. 
यज्ञतपःक्रियाः —x»vii. 25. Sera q:en xviii. 3. 
AMATATT fgg xvii. 24. यज्ञभाविता:--111. 12. 
यज्ञाविद:-- 1५. 30. 

यज्ञशिष्टामतमु जः--1०, 31. यज्ञशिष्टाशिनः. 13. 
जज्ञस-+ ०. 25; xvii. 12, 13. 
यज्ञः--iii. 14; ix. 16; xvi. 1; xvii. 7, 11; xviii. 5. 
यज्ञात--11. 14; iv. 33. यज्ञानां--5. 25. यज्ञाय-४. 23. 
siae ii. 9. GA wiv. 32; xvil. 23. 
यक्ष---. 15; xvii. 27. aĝa—iv. 25. यज्ञेषु". 28. 
यज्ञैः. 20. 
` सर्तचि'सस्थ--शं- 19. AAA ATAT iV. 21; vi. IO. 
यताचित्तेन्द्रियक्रिय:--४- 12. यतचेतसां-४- 26. 
यततः---1. 60. यतता--"।. 36. यंततां-- शा. 3. 
यतते at ततो भ्रयः संसिद्धा--४ं. 43. 
यतवाक्कारफमानस:- अण. 52. 
Spqeq:-—ix? I4; XV. II. यतमानः". 45- 
यतय:---1४- 28 ; viii. 11. 
थताव्मबान--शां. 11. BATT —Xil. I4. थतात्मान;--५- 25. 
erápat—v. 26. यतेन्द्रियमनोबद्वि+ ४. 29. 
यरच्छालामसंतुष्ट:-- ४. 22. 
यन्त्रारूढानि--ए. 01. 
खमः---%. 29 ; Xl. 39. 
खशाः. 5; xi. 33. * 

29 


390 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [यात-—यनिः 


यांतयामम--_इशा. IO. 

युक्तचतस:--शों. 30. युक्तचेष्टस्य. 17. 

युक्ततमः-- Vi. 47. यंक्ततमाः- 211. 2. 

युक्तस्वसावबोधस्य--"1. 17, 

gaii. 39, 61; ili. 20; iv. 18; v. 8, 12, 23; vi. 8, 
11, 18; vii. 22; viii. 10; xviii, 51. 

युकतात्ना--शों. 18 5 

यकताहारावदारस्य--॥1. 17. THAT SV. 17 

य॒गसहसखान्ता--0111. 17. युगे— 1४. 8 

युद्धस्‌. 32, Teta—ii, 31. युद्धाय-- 11. 37, 38, 

युद्धे--1. 23, 33; xviii. 43. युध्य". 7. अध्यस्व--नां, 
18; iii, 30; xi, 34. ययुत्सव:-1. I. 

योंगक्षेमं--!5£. 22. 

zir-qmum—vii. 12. -qa—viii. IO. -WE:—vi. 4I. 

योग-मायासमावृतः--४ं, 25. -यज्ञा:--1५. 28. -Jaa — 
v. 6, 7; viii. 27. -युकतात्मा--शं- 29. -fawar— 
xii, 1. -शासत्र-(Yoga-Shistram)— Com. vi. 16. 

योंग-संजितं--एं. 23. “संन्यस्तकूर्माएँ--1४. 41. -संसिद्धः 
—iv. 38. -संसिद्धि--शं, 37. -सेवया--॥. 20. -स्थः 
—. 48. -&—vi. 44 

यांग--1. 53; 1४. I, 425 V. I, 5; vi. 2, 3, 12, 19; vii 
1; 1X. 5; X. 7, 195 Xl. 8; xviii. 75 

योग:--. 48, 50; iv. 2, 3; vi. 16, 17, 23, 33, 36. 

यागात्‌". 37. यांगाझ--11. 50. 

योंगारूढस्य--॥. 3. योगारूढ:--0. 4. ^ 

योगिनं--ए. 27. योगिनः. 25; V. II; «i. I9; Viii. 
I4, 23; XV. II. योगिनां- य. 3; vi. 42, 47. . 

थोगित--5६. 17. योगी--४. 24; vi. 1, 2, 9, 10, 15, 28, 
31, 33, 45, 40; viii. 25, 27, 28; xii. 14. 

amii. 39. योगेन-2. 7; झां. 6; xiii 24; xviii. 
33- "INT. —v. 5 

यागश्वर--51. 4. IS: —xviii. 78 

SIS —xvVl. 19. 2 —xvi. 20. योनिः iV 


नी 


" 


- 


रजस:--लोकं! INDEX 391. 


T. 
TAT —X3N 16, 17. CsITq—xiv. 12, 15 
CSU—Xlv. 5, 7, 9, 10; XVil. 1. CSISIURTH3:—11. 37. 
रथ. 21. स्थोक्तम--1. 24. TAGET. 47 
रमते--४. 22; xviii. 30. ve —x. 9. 
रसवर्ज--1. 59. 
T:—ii. 55 ; vil. 8. रसात्मक:--5ए., 13. 
रहसि". 10. ररस्यम--7. 3. 
राक्षसी. 12. 
राग-हेषवियुकते:--11. 64. -दवेषो ii. 34; xviii. 51. 
रागात्मकं--॥1ए. 7. quti—xviii. 27. 
राजयुह्य-- इ. 2. राजाविद्या--5. 2. 
राजषंयः-४. 2 ; ix. 33. 
राजसस्य--5णा. 9. राजसं xvii. 72, 18, 21; xviii. 9, 
21, 24, 38. (WHA:—Xvill, 27. राजसा:--शॉ. 12 ; 
xiv. 18; xvii. 4. राजसी- अणी. 2 ; xviii. 31, 34- 
राज्यसुखलोभेन--!. 45. राञ्येन-1. 32. 
qr—vii 17. राबेः--शंगे, 25. TSaTTA—vill. 18, 19. 
रूधिरप्रदिग्धान-नों, 5. " 
रूपस्य--हां, 52. रूप». 3, 9, 20, 23, 45, 477 49 50 
51, 52; XV. 3; xviii. 77. रूपाणि-ऊा. 5. 
iqu—xi. 46. 
| ल्‌. 
लघध्वाशी--हश11. 52. i 
लाभे--४.७22- लाभालाभो- 1. 38. 
ferm —v. "7, 10; xiii. 31 ; xviii, 17. लिपन्ति--17. 14. 
लुप्तापिशडोदकक्तिया:-1. 42. 
लेलिह्यसे. 30 
लाकक्षयकृव--ः1. 32 
लोकत्रयं--5४. 20; XV, 17. लोकत्रयं, 43: 
ARATAI. 3. 
लोकसंग्रहमू- iil. 20, 25. 
लोकं —ix. 33 ; Xii 33. s 


399 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [लोकः-विश्वद्धा 


लोकः- 111. 9, 21; Iv, 31, 40; शा, 25; xil. I $ 
लोकायातिका:--(7..0६8ए०४88) Com. xvi. 8. 
लोभः iV. 12, 17 ; Xvi. 21. लोभोपहतचेतस:-. 38, 


p. 
वरुगा:--£. 29; Xl. 39. 
वर्णसंकरकारकेः--. 43. वर्णसंकरः--1. 41. 
वत्मं-- 11. 23; iv. 11. n 
qui—iii. 34; vi. 26. 
वशी--५४. 13. वश्यात्मना--"॥. 36. 
q3zIfa—ix, 22. 
AHS. 34. वाङ्मय AT:—xvil. 15. 
वाद:--5. 32. 
ara:—ii. 67; vii, 4; ix. 65 xi, 39; xv. 8. 
qaga svii. 74. वासुदेवः- शा. 19; x. 37 ; Xİ. 50. 
विकारान-- 1. 19. e 
fraa-memu:.—vi. 28. -sqt:—iii. 30. -TE:— Vl. 14. 
विगतस्पृहः. 56; xviii. 49. विगतेच्छाभयक्रोघः १. 28. 
विजितात्मा. 7. विजितेन्द्रियः-ङ. 8. 
faarauf&eq—ix. 1. विज्ञानं 2४1i. 42. 
faawet—(Vitanda) Com. x. 32. 
वितताः HAUT सुखे - 17. 32. 
विदेतात्मनाँ--५४- 26. 
विद्याविनयसंपन्ने--५. 18. विद्वान 11. 25, 26. 





विधिदरष्टः--४णां. 11. विधिहीनं रणा. 13. a 
farsi. —( Vidhi)—Coz. xviii. 70. 
Raami. 64. e 

विनाशाय दुष्कृता- 7. 0. j 

विनियतं चित्तं--४. 18. विनिवृत्तकामाः 2४. 5. 2 


fduu—x. 12. विश्वः ४- 15. 

Rrafe-fi.—x. 16. -qq—x. 41. -स-5. 7, 18. 
विमूढात्मा--71. 6. विसूढाः न agyra —3v. TO. 
विविक्तदेशसेवित्वस--51. 10. fafa«neidt —sviii. 52. 
विशुद्धया seu —3sviE. 51. AJAY. 7. 


विश्वतों--शमः | INDEX 39 


Cx 


Aasai 15; xi 11. विश्वतोपुख:--5. 33 

faud—xi 46. विश्वरूपः. I 6 

विश्वम--४1. 19, 38, 47. विश्वेश्वर si. 16 

विषयप्रवाला:- ४४. 2. विषयान्‌. 62, 64; iv. 2 6. xv. 
Q; xviii. 51, विषया:--. 59. 

विषयेन्द्रियसयोगात-“ “५1. 38. 

विषं इव--४0111. 37, 38. 

विसर्ग -—vili. 3. 

वीतरागभय-क्रोधा-- य. 56. -कोधाः- i". 10. 

वतिरागा:--- 11. II. 

वृजिनं ज्ञानशवेन सन्तरिष्यसि--1४. 36. 

zars AA xi. 38. 

वेत्ति तत्वतः- 10९. 9; vii. 3; X. 7- 

बेदयज्ञाध्ययंनेः-2।. 48. वेदवादरता:-- 11. 42. 

वेदावित--£४ए. 1, 15. Wafqa:—vill. IT. 

वेदान्तक्ृत--5ए. 15. वेदाः. 45; xvii. 23. 

वेदितव्यम्‌. 18. afag—xviii. 1. 

Eg—ii. 46; viii. 28. "9z—xv, 18. 

"AS:—xi. 53; XV. 15." 

dep—ix. 17; Xi. 36. वेद्यः 2X४. 15 

yqa xiii. 8; xviii. 52. वेराग्येण- शा, 3 5 

SqWRH—xviil. 44. AIAX. 32 

त्रेश्वानरः- XV. 14. 

व्यक्तमध्यानि- ii. 28, : 

esnqu—viii. 18. sqepiq—vil. 24; X. 144 

व्यथा--शी. 49. व्यथिष्ठाः. 34. 

व्यपा श्रत्य-1%. 32 

वयवसायः--ॐ. 36; xviii. 59. व्यवसायात्मिका--- 47, 4३. 

व्यासप्रसादात्‌ xviii. 75- व्यासः = 13, 37 

श्‌. 

` शतक्रलुः-—(Satakratu)— Com. ix. 20. 

UZAN. 44 

gpp—xi. 24. शमः". 35 2 4 XVIL, 42. 


394 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [शएर-षणमा 


एश. 49 : ix. 18 ; xviii. 62, 66. 
शरीर-यात्रा--1, 9. -त्थ--अणा. 6. -egp:—xiii. ¢ 
शरीर--11. I; xv. 8. शरीरिणा:--1. 18. 
muai — i. 19. sd 
णान्तरजसं--४1- 27. Wea :—_ VI. 53. 
शान्ति--1 70, 71: iv. 39; V. 12, 29; Vl. 15; 1X. 31; 
xviii. 62. शान्त. 66 ; xii. 12; xvi, 2. 
णाश्वतधमंगोप्ता-- हं. 18. 
णाश्वते--5. 12; xviii. 50, 62. शाश्वत:--11. 20. 
णास्त्र-विधानोकरत-- syi. 24. -विर्धे-ऊशां, 23 ; xvii. 1. 
SITE[—5v. 20; 5४, 24. 
शिष्यः. 7. शिब्येण--. 3. 
शींतोष्णसुख-दुःखदा:- 11. 14. -दुःखेषु--एं. 7; xii. 18. 
शक्ककृष्णे गती-- एं. 26. Ye—vill. 24. 
शुचिः--ह्यो. 16. gatat—vi. 47. झचो-शं. 11, 
शुभाशभ-परित्यागी--जा!. 17. -फ्ले:--7. 28. -g—ii. 57,” 
agea viii. 44. शूद्राणां svii. 41. शुद्रा:-5., 32. 
शोचितु न Eri. 26, 27, 30. - 
ST p— xiii. 7 ; xvi. 3, 7 ; xvii. 145 xviii. 42. 
sm3—xviil. 43. 

EWA: यां. 20. श्रद्धबा--शं, 37; vii. 21, 22; डि. 
23; xii. 2 ; xvii. 1, 17. अद्धा XV. 2, 3. 
आप्रद्धा-मयः-- 5१. 3. -वम्तः- iii. 31. -HTH—iY. 39; vi. 

47 5 xviii. 71. -H—vil. 21. 
zii —(Sráddha)— Com, i. 42. 
sfiqa—sx. 41. श्रीमताँ--शं. 41. 
zi[:—x. 34 ; xviii. 78. 
आुति-परायणा:--511. 25. -विप्रातिपन्ना- ii. 53. 
परेयः-. 31; ii. $735 iii, 2, 11. 35; V. 1; xii, 12} 

xvi. 22. Spgma—4ii. 35 ; iv. 33 ; Xviil. 47. 
श्वपाके--५. 18. 


e 


Lud 


E] * 
बृशमासाः“- vili. 24, 25 


» 


inaina] INDEX Ji 


; a. 

संग-रहित॑' 23. qias. 55. -“विवजितः-- 
xii. 18. संगं--1. 48; v. 10, 11; xviii, 6, 9. 

संग:--11. 47, 02. संगात--11.902. 

सचराचरम्--5. 10; Xi y 

सतत-युकतानां--5. 10. -JRAT:— Iİ. 1. 

ga:—ii. 16. qa—is. 19; xiii. 12; xvii. 23, 26, 27. 

सत्ये--४£. 4; xvi. 2, 7; xvii, 15 ; xviii. 65. 

सत्त्ववता--5. 36. सच्वसमार्विष्टाः--5५1॥. 10. 

सच्वसंशुद्धि Avi. 1. सच्वस्था:---आ४. r8, 

सत्त्व. 36, 41; xiii. 26; xiv. 5, 6, 9 10, 11: xvii, 
I; xvi. 40. WxaTd—xiV. 17. 

सत्त्वानुर्पा--४५"1. 3. W*d—Xlv. 14. 








"तदसवच्योनिजन्मसु--»111. 21. 

सनातनं--ए. 31; vli, 10. सनातनः- 1. 24; Willy 201 
xi. 18: xv. 7. सनातनाः- 1. 40. 

'सम-विनत्वे-511. 9. «TX. 5. "त्वां. 43. 

सम-दर्शनः. 29. -दर्शिनः-- ४. 18. 

समदु:ख-सुखं--. IS. -सुख:--511. 135 xiv, 24. 

समबुद्धयः. 4. सम्बुद्धिः" 9. 

समलोष्टाश्‍मकाच्चन:- vi. 9; Xiv. 24. 

समं--४. 19: vi. 13, 32 ; शी. 27 28 

सम: 48; iv. 22; 1x. 295 XH 18 ; xviii. 54. 

garea i. 54. समाधा. 44 53 

समाहतु-- ४. 32. 

समाहितः--शं 

ससुद्धता-- 1. 7. 

समे meri 38. समौ--४- 27. 

सम्यग्व्यवसितः ix. 30 | 

सर्मः--५. 19. सगाणां--5. 32. AMV. 27; XIV. 2. 

सर्दकमफलत्यागं- xii. 11; XMM. 2 

सर्वकर्माणि. 26; iv. 37; V. 13; xviii. 50, 5 


396 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA [सर्वेका--संभवा 


सर्वकामिभ्य:--ण॑. 18. सर्वकिल्बिषैः, 13. 

सर्वगतं. 15; xiii. 32. सर्वगतः. 24. 

सर्वशुह्यतमं- xviii. 64. 

सर्वतः-- ii. 46 ; xi. 16, 17, 40; xiii. 13. 

सर्वच --11. 57; vi 30, ^42 $ xii. 4; xii 28, 32; 
xviii. 49. सर्ववगं- 511 3. सर्वेत्रगः--5, 6. 

सर्वया वतेमानोंपपि--छं. 31 ; xiii. 23. t 

सर्वद्वाराणि. r2. gdgWmw—xiv. 11. 

सर्वधर्मान्‌ qersa—sviii. 66. 

सर्व-पापेस्यः- xviii. 66. -qpq:—x. 3. 

सर्वभादेन--5४. 19; xviii. 62. 

सर्वभूत-स्थ- "1. 29. -स्थिते--शं. 31. 

सर्दश्रतहिते TaT:—V. 25; Xil. 4. 

सर्वभूतात्मभूतात्मा-". 7. सर्वभूताशयस्थितः. 20, 

सर्वर. 14. सर्वलोकमहेश्वरं-४. 29. 

aiias, IQ. 

सर्वसंकल्पसंन्यासी-\1. 4. 

TATRA xii. 16; xiv. 25. safe —xviii.48. 

सर्वोन्द्रिय-गुणाभासं--511, 14. -Aaii 14. 

सब्यसाचिन्‌--अं. 33. 

सहज HRA—sviii. 48. 

azaga riii S1 

संकरस्य--11. 24. संकरः. 42. 

संकल्प-प्रभवात्‌--ण॑. 24: -a—(Sankalpa)—Com. yi, 2. 

Sqzg:—ii. 17 ; xii. 14, 19. E 

S eT UI. 4. e 

संन्यस्य--1!. 30; v. 13 ; xii. 6. xviii. 57. 

संन्यासयोगयुक्तात्मा-- ix. 28. : 

संन्यासस्य--5५11. 1. संज़्यासं--ए. 1; vi. 2; xviii. 2. 

संन्यास:--". 2. 6; xviii. 7. संन्यासिना iii. 12. 

संन्यासी--४ं. 1. demgqaq-—sviii 49. 

संपत्‌. 5. संपद्‌. 3, 4, 5. 

संभव: संवेश्वतानां--४५ 3. संभवामे-४- 6, 8. 


a 


[d 


संमो--झुखं | INDEX 397 


सेमोहे-शां. 27. संमोंह:--. 63. 

gaang iv. 39. dudt—ii, 69. 

संयम्य. 61 ; iii. 6; vi 14 ; vill, 12 

संशयं--!४ए- 42 ; vi. 39. संशयात्मनः, ATATAT—iv. 40 
संशितत्रताः--1ए. 28 i 

AURE — Vi. 45. 

SESS —xyl. 19. 

sfera — iii. 20 ; viii, 15; xviii, 45. Sfaet—vi. 43. 
सस्पशञ्ञाः भागाः ४. 22. 

संहरते. 58. 

साक्षी--1४. 18. | 

aiana aii. 8. 

«ere —xiv. 16; xvii. 17, 20; xviii. 20, 23. 37 
सालिक: Vii. 11; xviii. 9, 26. सात्विकाः-- णा. 12; 
vii, 4. सात्विकी ७1. 2; xviii. 30. 33. 

साघिसूताविदेवस्‌- vii. 30. साधियज्ञम--शों- 30 
साधुषु--५. 9. ATT:—ix. 30. साघूना-1४. 8 
सांम--£. 17, -d«:—X. 22. ATAI—x. 35 
साम्ये--४. 19. साम्येन-\।. 33. 
सांख्ययोगो 
eia —(Sánkhya)— Com. xviii. 13 and 19. 
सांख्यें--ए. 5. सांख्यानां. 3. सांख्ये. 39; vill. 13. 
सांख्येन-5111. 24. qRep:—v. 5 
सिद्धः xvi, 14. सिद्धानां". 3; x. 26 
सिद्धि—iii. 4; iv. 12; xii. 10; XIV. 1; XVI. 23; xviii, 
45,46, 50. सिद्धिः. 12. सिद्धा 1४. 22 
सिद्धघसिद्धघोः-ii. 49; xviii. 26 
सुक्रतदुषक्कत- ५. 50 
सकुतस्य--॥ए. 16. ggå—v. 15. सुक्ातनः vit. 1 6 
सुख-दुःखे. 38. -दुःखसंज्ञे:--50-5. -gami xiii. 20 
सुखसंगेन- xiv 6. सुखस्य--517. 27. 
aq—ii 66; iv. 40; V. 3, 13, 21; Vl. 2I 
x. 4 ; xiii. 6; xvi. 23; xviii 36, 37, 38» 3५. 
30 





008. SRIMAD-DILAGAVAD-GITA.— [सुखा -स्वर्र 


gii. 21.02. 
साखिनः--1., 37:17. 32. gup—v. 23; xvi. द © 
HUp—xiv. y. -A—vi. 28. -q—ii. 56. 
सुद्राचार:--13. 30. 

सुरगणाः--४. 2. सरन्द्रलावाम--5. 20. 
gga—vi. 9: ix. 18. ggd—v. 29. 
सूक्ष्मत्वात्‌ MARAN. 15. z 
qai—vii. 25 

सवते". 20. सेवया-- ०. 34. 
सोमपा:--15४. 20. सामः ४४. 13. 
साम्यत्वम्‌--४ T5; सोम्यम्‌. Si 
स्तेन:--111. 12. 

स्त्रियः 32 स्वीप. 41. 5 
स्यावरजराममू-- ५1. 20. स्थावशणां--5. 25. 
स्यित-प्रज्ञेस्य--!।. 54. "Nap. 55. "बीभ. 5+ 56. , 
स्थिर-बुदाधिः--५, 20. -मतिः- 3.19. ome. 11; xi 9. 
स्थिर:--४. 13. स्थिरा--॥. 33. feaxr—xvii. 8, 
asii. 7. " 

स्प्शानू--". 27. 

स्पृहा. pic Are. 

wqifa— ili. 14. pmi 6; vii. 5, 6. 

Aaa ii. 63. egit ii. 05. 

ESÍT:—x. 34; XV, 15 ; xviii. 73. 


Ld 


स्वकर्मगा--5॥11. 46. E 


e 


Co ane i 
स्वकमनिरलः-४४ii. 45. 
s oe € one » ५4 
स्व-धर्म-_ 1. 31, 33. ~qai—ili. 35 ; xviii. 47€ 


eqar—ix, 16. zu 

स्दभाव-ज्ञस्‌- viiL. 42, 43. 44. ST-V. 2. जवे 
xviii. 60. -नियतेन-४णाएं, 47. -Spra;—a viii. 41. 

स्भाव:--४- I4; Vill. 3. 

eqUfq—ix. 20. 

mnm ii, 32. -qXr:—il. 43. 

atak ix. 21, epi 37. 


à 


jam 50 


e 
eO 
e 


स्वास्त- दी: | INDEX 
स्वास्ति--51. 21. 
= स्वस्थः 3७. 24. 
स्वाथ्यायज्ञानयज्ञाः--।". 28. 
स्वाध्यायः". 1. 
स्वाथ्यायाग्युसनस-~- ४". I 5. * 
स्वां Wata—iv. 0; ix. 8. 
: t x. 
इते. 19. इतः. 37; xvi. 14. इताह. 34. 
इत्वा. 31, 36. 37; ii, 5. 6; xviii. 17. 
हानेष्ये--5४ां. 14. 
हन्तारं. 19. zfeq—ii. L9; 21: XVI, 17. 
Xed—i. 35, 37, 45. 
दम्यते. I9, 20. हन्यमाने--11. 20, हन्यु:--. 46. 
FR. 9. ररे. 77. 
कृथेशोकान्वितः- xvii. 27. 
ह्षामषभयोद्वेगे;-- ४. 15. 
ara: —iv, 24. 
[za —sxiii. 28. : 
इसात्मक:- "iii. 27. AT—xviii.25. 2 
हिरण्यगर्भ —(Hiranyagarbha)—Com. xi. 37. / 
हुतम्‌ Iv. 24; ix. 16; xvii. 28, / 
हतज्ञाना:-\1i. 20. / 
हृदयदीबल्यं--11 . 3. | 
g-a ix. 10. -HÍg:—xiil. 4.» 
Sq:—xiii, 20. 
हू 15९1. zx 


x Q z 
क atenta MI 
= 


S riħ ad-Bhagavad-Gita. 


ERRATA. 
MEDITATION 
For: Read : 
S7. 1 & pphr. प्रतिवोधितां प्रतिबोधितां 
ii wea भगवङ्गीते 
» » phr. & fr. Narayana Náráyana 
» n PPr. अष्टादशाध्वायिनी अ्रष्टादशाध्यायिनीं 
"C HA, त्वाम अम्बे, त्वास्‌ 
» 2+ Tq: qur 
Sad dd. पद्मनेत्र TTA 
क. Sa as a as the petals of a 
Pre य य, Ashvathima Ashvathama 
» 7 » हरिकयासं्ेधनावोवितं हरिकथासंबोधनाबोधिते 
» 9 & pphr. मुके मूक 
» 9 quur TRUE 
» » PPr., वरुण, इन्द्र, रुद्र वरुणः, इन्द्रः, रूद्रः 
INVOCATION 
: For: . Read: 
H.34 . Ashvathama Ashvathámá 


 SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 
-Chapter I. 


For: Read: 
S7. 1 pphr. चतरा” TATE: 
१2 5 संजय, sys संजयः, व्यूढं 


Abbreviations used :—SL. for Sloka ; ZZ. for line : pplr’, for 
a e 
paraphrase ; ér, for translation ; cen, for comment, 


SRIMAD-PILAGAVAD-GITA 


Read : 
उच्तुमाजाश्च , 
विक्रान्तः 
rary, ब्रवीमि 
words 
su. 
अन्य च 
ब्ले, बलं, बले. 
कुरुवृद्धः, TSA 
सहदेव: 
महाबाहः, महाबाह: 
तुमुलो5भ्यतुनादयन्‌ 
सः, अभ्यनुनादयन 
दुर्बुद्धेः, योत्स्यमानात्‌ 
gz 1 अवेक्षे 
HST ह 
पार्थः, उभयोः 
पितृन्‌ , भ्रातून , 
बन्धूत्‌ 
सः, WATT 
न neither बिजय 


victory sq राज्ये च and not 


XIV 
For: 

50, ८ उत्तमाजाश्र 
ts विक्रान्त 
a’ निवोध, त्रवीमि 
र ,५ (४727. werd s 

« वहतः 
FR १: अ्रन्येच 
Tak pphr. वले. वलं, वलं 
n 12 ppar. कुख्वृद्ध:. सङ्खं 
"T x सहदेव: 

. 15 &, महावाहुः महावाहु: 
s T तुइुलोऽव्यचुना दयत 
.. 2/7. स. अव्यचुनादयन्‌ 
23 pphr. दु्ुद्धेः, योतस्यमानात्‌ 

e ns wad 
25 y qud 

. 26 2; वार्थ, उभयो 
Hon वितून्‌ , आतृच्‌ 
27 बन्छन्‌ e 
, » DAT. स. ग्रत्रवीत्‌ 
क. secans dH fA 3031 ...and 
es. 4th ,, न not Hea 
. 32 भोगे: 

n 34 x pp. स॑वन्धिनः 
e 35 fphr. मधुसुदन 
> 37 AJATTI 
n १० DPA स्ववान्थवान्‌ 
+ 38. 39 » quu 
gast Ee decay of of 
»42 PpAr. त्ुप्तापिशडोदकाऊरेया: 
Eo 5 ux मनुष्यानां 
१ १5 4 ब्यवसिता:, अहोवत 


Rea 
भागे: 
संबान्धिर: 
मधछुम्रदन 
एतान्न “1201 इन्तुं 
स्वबान्धवान्‌ -« 
स्वबान्थवान्‌ ^ 
प्रपर्श्याङ्गः 
decay of 
लुप्रपिणडोदकाकियाः 
मनुष्याणां 
व्यवासिताः, अहो बत 


Chapter IT: 
हु e 


SLs 
m 

39 7 

$ ५9३ PPRT: 

११ Id CO. 


» TS Pps. 


PP Ar. 


eu पटक] 5j 
7^ 
PE —-- 29 
E. 6 ph 
9 35 
"pm ppar. 
१2 30 22 


5365 & phr. 
va ag PAI 
» +1 & pr. 


११ ११ Pp A vs 


» 45 COM. 


» 19 ppar. 


११ 2 l ” 

»n2T p» 
x 

Te Fo un 

शाक 

” 

-T 55 63 » 
E M 

LE N 2 

33 00 ११ 


s 65 & ppar. 
95 70 Mr. 
2? 7 I 12 


22 7 ४ P? A P. 


१92 न 4 4 fp A r. 


ERRATA 


For: 
हृदयदोदेल्यं 
ब्रह 
ate, स्वा ` 
more 
a 
a 
जीणोणि 
महावाहों 
वहमतों 
FERA: 
IRT 
कमेवन्यं 
बुद्धिः, चुद्धया 
वहुशाखा 
gafa, बुद्धयः 
TAVITA 


क्रियाविशेबवहलां 


gafa 
uu 
बुटूधियोगात्‌ 
बुदार्थ-, -वन्ध- 
gp ` 
Self स्थास्यति 


बुदूधिनाशात्‌ 
gafa: 
महावाहो 

स 


23 


त्राह्मी, त्रह्मानिबायी 


जीणानि 
महाबाहो 
बहुमता 
बहुमतः 
SES 
eue 
बुद्धः. Sear 
FENET 
बुद्दिः, बुद्धयः 
भारेश्वथगति 
क्रियाविशेषयहुला 
gafa: 
with ee. 
बुद धियोगात 


 बुदाथे., -बन्धः 


gir 
Self निश्चल्ला im- 
movable स्थास्याति 
CEAR DIEUS 
बुद्धः 


ब्राह्मी, ब्रह्मनिर्वाणं 


xvi SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


Chapter III: 


ST. 2 pphr. 

» 4 Com. 

» © pphr. 

»7 » 

»9 ppar. 

3) 12 23 

5 ig PDA. 
5,298 pphr. 

» 36 & ,, 

» » PPAr. 
587 dox s 
s 38 & ppar. 
s DPA 

» 39 » 

» 105 

» 43 & pphr. 
» Pphr. 
Chapter IV : 


SL. 1 pphr. 
2) 4 3? 


3? 5 7J 
3) IO 33 


wu 
Ms 


For: 
बुद्धि 
free all 


^ 


स 
HATTA: 
स्तेन 
सर्वकिल्विषे: 
महावाहों 
वलात्‌ 
पुरुष: 
Raja-Guna 
उल्वेन 
वाहु 
आवृतं 
are said 
महावाहो 
बुट्घ्वाः" 


Vivasván, मनु 
अर्जुन 
वहूनि 
बह्वः 


Re ad : re 
बुद्धि 
166 from all 
q: 
RART: 
स्तेन : E 
सर्वकिल्बिषैः 
महाबाहो 
बलात्‌ 
í JET: 
Rajo-guna न 
उल्बेन 
वाहे: 
wad 
is said 
महाबाहों- 
RELELI 


ri 


Vivasvat, qd: 
nia: 
बहूनि 
बहवः८ 


> I1 com. All paths are His My paih..-all ways 


» 14 & pphr. 
» I5 ppar. 

3 33 r. & ८०१८. 
» 17 


aF 
Ms 


» 20 & pphr. 
TEEI phr 


te 


वध्यते 
knowing this 
pact 


किल्चित्‌ 
CRAURSISÉ 


'बध्यते 
=~ 
पूर्वः “o 
knowing thug 
TETSIT 


„fbir. वोदवव्यं, वोदधव्ये, वोदधव्य बोद्धव्यं, 


बोद्धव्यं, बोद्धव्ये 
किचित 
कमफल्लासडूं 


Chapter IV 


» Sl. 21 N ppar. 


22 
ISS UNE 23 


^ 
335 33? 


23 24 
, 26 pphr. 

, 20 

75 20 
9) 392) ppar. 

27 

3 Eai 


» 36 pphr. 


7 2») 4 I 95 ^ 


, Chapter V. 
ih 3 ppar. 


ERRATA 


Tor: 
किल्विषं 
निवध्यते 
V]. 22. 

AAAs 
शाव्डादीच्‌ 
साॉशतबताः 
प्राणान्प्रोणु 
अपाण. प्राणापाण- 
वहुविधाः 
वाजिनं 

faaatea 


महावाहो, TTL 


» 4 & pphr. वाला: 
^, 6 ppar. महावाहो, STET 

27 8, 9 o» तत्वाबिव्‌ 
128 , निवध्यते 

» 15 ppar. eof none 

» 19 n AA 

oe त्रह्मादिव्‌ 

, 22 pphr. ay: 

» 27, 28 pphr. वाह्मान्‌, वहिः 
Chapter VI. r 
SZ, 4 phr. Verily 

१9 ११ कमस ..not 

aô s» वन्धुः 
„8 „ BTCA: -लोष्टाश्म- 
n9. cs -वन्छछु ` 

» 12 & pphr. JANMA 

» » PPA. in the seat 

21 4 shearer, ead 

3:035. 5 IV. x5. . 


t 


31 


Read: 
किलिपिएं 
Agera 
IV. 23. 

BEY 

शब्दादीत 
संशितत्रता: 
ग्राखान्प्राणेषु 
अपानं, प्राशापान- 
बहाविधाः 
वृजिनं 
aura 


महाबाहो, बन्धात्‌ 
बाला: 
महाबाहो, ब्रह्म 
aaa 
निनरध्यते 
of anyone 
ste] 
agaa 
ay: 
बाह्यान्‌ , बहिः 


Verily q neither 
न nor कमसु in actions 


बन्धुः 


कूटस्थः, -लोष्टारम- 


-aeS 
युञ्ज्यात्‌ 
on the seat 


afgang. स्थित: 


v I « 25० 


xviil SRIMAD-BHAGAVAD-GITA 


Chapter VI. For: 


SL 34 ppar. वलवत 
p50-5 दुष्प्राप 

T 9 महावाहो 

५.9. s संशद्धाकिल्विषः 
a d7 «024 Of all Fogis 


Chapter VIT. 
SL 5 £ ppr. महावाहो 


28 Bir. प्रभाः, RT 
bil a sun 
> 10 phir. ats 
» il » TATA, वलं 
ee i डरत्यया 
slt Pphr. देवि 
piu वहूनां 
ES us manifest 
see 5 टढब्रताः 

Chapter VIII. 

Sl. 7 com. me, me 
» 10 & 72/7. योगवलेन 
25 22 33 33 THI 
524 pphr. Ast 
v25 » रात्रे 

Chapter IX, 

Si. 2 pphr. TAG 
s» ४३ "regm 
514 Tsaa: 
११ ११ 0067. भक्त्या 
528 , सन्यासयोग 
३१ ga COPE, Liberated 
» 34 Bpár. सच्मना 


Read: 


बलव र्‌ 

दुष्प्रापः 

महाबाहो 
संशुद्धकिल्बिषः 


Of all Fogis (८, 


~~ 
-- 


महावाहो 
प्रभा, पौरुष 
SON 
बीजे 
यलवता, बलं 
दुर्या 
देवी 
SEI ^ 
manifest 4 not 
CEA: 2 


Ate, Me 
योंगबलन 
UIT 
RBI 
Ura: - 


qaaa 
पेश्वर > 
zgaat: 
YF 
संन्यासयोग- 
Liberated Er. 
सन्मचाः 


sN 3 132 q 
0 ap मानसा 
23 7 23 स 
259 72 मच्चिताः + 
gd s rasta 
११ 34 मेधाः 
* 9 4O 5 . एष्‌ 
Chapter XI, 
ST. 3 pphr. रुपस्‌ 
»6 „» वहुनि, अद्रष्टपूर्वाणि 
» 9 » संजय 
कलि अनेकवक्रनयनं 
» 14 » स्‌, ZAT: 
sy 16:5 अनेकबाहूदरवक्तनेचं 
Ec ZWEIG 
5» 20 » द्यावापृथिव्याः, रुपं 
ý ११ 21 y सुरसधा:; व्यास 
5) 22 बिजिताश्रेव 
iss PPAT. उष्मपाः 
» 23 » AF- AE- रुपम्‌ 
22 24. P बिष्णो 
, 20, 27 227. व्वरमाणा 
»go वक्राणि, विलग्ना, 
, 28 
, 202227. वक्राणि 
2) 20 & pr. 2? 
> » 30 pphr. जल्नद्धि:, बिष्णों 
22 34 m SALT: -७ 
93 32 >? प्रवृत्तः 
233 » उत्तिष्ट 
99 39 » TA 
» 44 >? adorable हि 


ERRATA 


Chapter X, For: 


XIX 


Read : 


S: 
मानसाः 
a: 
सचित्ताः 
fasta 
मेधा 
Ty: 


EJH 
बहूनि, अदृष्टपूर्वाणि 
संजय: 
अनेकवक्त्रमयनं 
सः, इटरोमा 
अनेकबाहूदरवकत्रनेत्रं 
«RESI 
द्यावापृथिव्योः, रूपं 
सुरसंघाः, त्वास 
विस्मिताश्रेव 
ऊष्मपाः 
“ata -, “बहू”, Eqa 
विष्णो 
त्वरमाणाः 
वक्त्राणि, AAM: 


अभ्बुवेगाः, वक्राशि अम्बुवेगाः, वक्त्राणि 


वक्त्राणि 
sais: विष्णो 
TST: 
अवृत्त+ 
उत्तिष्ठ 
भूयः 
adorable gar. Lord 


WX SRIMAD-BITAGAVAD-GITA 


Chapter XI. For: Read : 
SI. 53 ppar. शक्य शक्यः 

2554 » एवंविधस एवंविधः 
Chapter XII. l 
E अव्यक्त अव्यत 

» 3.4 225r. तियस्य संनियश्य 

» 16 ॥१३॥ uve 

E संगविबार्जतः संगविंदाजितः 

» 20 pphr. प्रियः प्रियाः 
Chapter XIII. 
SL. 5 बुद्धिरब्यक्तमेव बुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव 

» 13 ppar, rasta fasta 

ee अनादि ग्रनादी 

» 25 com. Others : From others: From 
Chapter XIV. ५ 
SL. 6 pphr. बन्नाति बश्नाति 

»9 » भावृत्य है आवृत्य : 


» 10 , 4th. 2, वथा... Tam तथा एव so also तमः 
Tamas सत्व Satva 


tat: Rajas 

a केके, अप्रवृत्तिः अप्रवृत्तिः 

E गत्दाऽकर्मसंगिषु गत्वा कर्मसंगिषु 
» 13 Phir. तिष्टन्ति तिष्ठन्ति 

wos TUTTE Nun 
pat us अर्जुन Tae: 

482 3३ GERIG] निवृत्तानि 
Chapter XV, B 
SI. 12 न्यचात्रों SATAY 

9 I5 CON, knowledge perception 

416 artat हाविमी 

» 20 pphr. JEAN बुद्ध्वा 


»»'5à s ARIA बुद्धिमा 


ERRATA 
shapier XVI For: 
Si. 2 pper. सूतेषु 

as 35 dae 
M. due s qaia 
2 8 » UTE % 
reo oe SUID 
nus 4. qM 
a I0 225r. mrt: 
Chapter XVII. 

Sl. 28 pphr. zz 


Chapter X VIII. 


SI. 6 pphr. निश्चय 
SS Say त्रिविधाः 
2 99 59 35 HN 
n» ÓI y तिष्टाते 
इ? 05 » मन्मना 
» 66 , „~ ua 
se OO s ऐष्यति 
१३ 75. “39 SH 
od SUIS 
nu és पडतं 
2) A 2 म्‌ 
© 
DN N 


XXi 


Read: 
भूतेषु 
संपत 
qui 

ते आहुः 
च उपाश्रिताः 
ere 
siat: 


न्‌ च and not zz 


निश्चित 
त्रिविधा 
एषः 
तिष्ठाति 
मन्मनाः 
शच 
एष्यति 
एतत्‌ 
साक्षात directly 
योगेश्वरात्‌ 
FAST most 
मम 


ARATA 





\ OR 
A 
AWAKENED INDIA 


A monthly journal devoted to the advanced and 
liberal thought, old and new, conducted from their 
Ashrama on the Himalayas by the brotherhood 
founded bs the Swami Vivekananda. 

Annual subscription Re. 1-8-0. To Libraries 
and Reading-rooms As. 12. For poor students 
Re. 1, Foreign 45s. or $1. 

„ The Fifteenth Volume begins in January 1910. 
se For sample copy write to Manager, P. B. 


WORKS OF SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 


Books at concessíon rates to Subscribers 
of Prabuddha Bharata 


HIMALAYAN SERIES Usual price, To Subscribers. 
My Master see anA Ts. aec तात ती 
Sankhya and Vedan DNE ee Cop 
Atman uiw ed) SO 
Bondage and Freedom uc. SN ति 
Chicago Parliament of Reli- 

gions Addresses ... i ' १७ ek duce 
Do. Do 5 copies ... Rs. 2-12-0 ... 1-12-0 


Jnana Yoga, pp. 168. 9%” x 732... Re. 1-8. Re. 
Epistles of Swami Vivekananda 

Ist Series 2nd Edition ws 0-6-0 ... O-4-0 
From Coiombo to Almora ... 2-0-0 ... 1-14-0 





a 
The Swami Abhedananda's Lec- 
tures and Addresses in India.» 1-8-0 ... 1-4-0 
Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita, by Swami 
Swarupananda . 2-8-0 ... 2-0-0 





Total Rs. 12-1-0 ... Rs. 9-6-6 
Postage extra ^ 


; `~ d > 1 

Works of Swami Vivek d 

orks of Swami Vivekananda — XA uox cs 
Modern India.—-Translated frerz the BR. A. P. 

Bengali writings of Swamiji. [est out 'O 4 ० 

. P m 

Bhakti Yoga—(zo Chapters) o 6 o 
Two Lectures on Karma Yoga ... O 2 0 
Practical Vedanta—in four parts ie dup ud 





THE COMPLETE WORKS 
OF i 
THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 
MAYAVATI MEMORIAL EDITION 


The Only Exhaustive and All-Compre-_, 
hensive Collection ever Published 
omprising all his Lectures, Addresses and Dais- * 

courses delivered in Europe, America and India’, 

all his writings in Prose and Poetry, together with 

Translations of those written in Bengali and Sans- 

frit; Reports of his Interviews and his Replies to 

the various addresses of Welcome ; his Sayings and 

LE pistles,—Private and Public—Original ard | 

Translated} Cc., Fc. With a Biography, Glossary 

and Index. 

CAREFULLY REVISED AND EDITED. 

A photogravure of Swamiji accompanies each. part. . 

To be completed in Six Parts. ~ 
Each part about 250 pp. 914 by 74 inches. 
Four parts are already out 


Each Part, Two Rs. Eight As. Foreign, 
One Dollar or Four Shillings. Postage- 
Extra. Dollar bills accepted 


Photographs of Sri Ramakrishna and Swami 
Vivekananda, (different postures) kept for sale 


Catalogue free on application. Apply to Manager 
Prabuddha Bharata, Luhaghat P. O., Almora. L. P. 


